Title: Subtraction Gets You More: Gap-Aware Retrieval for Multimodal Multi-Hop QA

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.28641v1

Published Time: Thu, 28 May 2026 01:45:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
## Subtraction Gets You More: Gap-Aware Retrieval for Multimodal Multi-Hop QA 

Sunah O Jay-Yoon Lee *

Seoul National University {ec_osa16586, lee.jayyoon}@snu.ac.kr 

Abstract 

In multimodal multi-hop question answering, we focus on the initial retrieval stage via two distinct tasks: (1) evidence set completion, re-trieving missing evidence given context, and (2) sequential pool construction, iteratively build-ing the top-K pool from the scratch. Un-der these settings, we point out that conven-tional iterative retrieval frameworks often suffer from Semantic Anchoring, where previously fetched evidence traps the retriever and yields entity-centric redundancy. To break this trap, we propose GRAIL (Gap-aware Retrieval via 

Adaptive Implicit Localization), a paradigm that performs implicit query rewriting directly at the embedding level. By context-subtractive query steering, GRAIL excels at compositional cross-modal reasoning, while additive embed-ding updates show strength on localized infor-mation aggregation. By dynamically routing queries based on task type, our Hybrid Frame-work achieves a 40.3% macro-averaged perfor-mance gain on MultimodalQA. Extensive eval-uations demonstrate that sequential GRAIL re-trieves in a superior, noise-resilient manner, sig-nificantly expanding the search horizon through iterative gap-aware optimization. 

1 Introduction 

In multimodal retrieval-augmented generation frameworks, the reasoning performance of Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) is fundamentally con-tingent on the quality of the evidence pool. While text-only tasks often allow models to rely on broad parametric knowledge, multimodal multi-hop ques-tions anwering (MMQA) demands a direct inspec-tion of explicit, modality-specific details. With-out having these context-dependent facts provided, LMMs cannot infer the high-density visual or struc-tural details–such as specific trends in a chart or the color of objects–that are crucial for accurate reasoning. Consequently, retrieval is not merely a 

> *Correspondence author

preliminary step; it effectively sets the performance ceiling of the entire retrieval-augmented LMM. To address multi-step dependencies, a single, initial query is inherently insufficient to cover the entire sequence of required evidence. A straightfor-ward alternative is to decompose the complex ques-tion a priori into independent sub-queries and exe-cute them sequentially (Talmor et al., 2021). Yet, such static decomposition frameworks immediately founder when confronted with open-domain multi-modality. In a vast multimodal corpus, it is nearly impossible to predict which modality–whether text, image, or table–contains the specific piece of evi-dence required for each hop. Because the modality of target facts remain unknown before the search begins, pre-determining a rigid textual decomposi-tion pathway is structurally unviable. To overcome this predictability barrier, a more dynamic paradigm has emerged: given an initial subset of evidence, subsequent queries are itera-tively regenerated by adding the acquired context. However, as illustrated in Figure 1, this evidence-additive query regeneration loop exhibits a critical structural failure we define as Semantic Anchor-ing. Instead of expanding the search space, the strong semantic gravity of previously fetched evi-dence traps the retriever, forcing an over-reliance on prominent entities (e.g., Lancashire Senior Cup). This leads to entity-centric redundancy, blindly fetching redundant assets while pushing the true target evidence– the complementary fact regarding Bolton’s emblem –out of the top-K rank. One might also ask why not simply rely on ad-vanced LMMs for explicit query regeneration. In practice, forcing dense visual observations through a narrow textual detour introduces non-trivial token overhead and a high susceptibility to semantic drift. When an explicit text-generation agent prematurely commits to an incorrect textual path–such as an-choring heavily on Manchester City (Figure 1)–the trajectory error compounds catastrophically. The 1                                                    

> arXiv:2605.28641v1 [cs.IR] 27 May 2026 Season Winners Score Runners -up
> 2007 -08 Manchester United 3-2Liverpool
> 2008 -09 Manchester United 1-0Bolton Wanderers
> …
> 2011 -12 Manchester United 4-0Accrington Stanley
> 2012 -13 Manchester United 2-1Manchester City
> Celtic 1-21-10-1-1
> [Table: 2006 -07 Motherwell F.C. season]#2
> North -Eastern League Cup Aberdeen
> [Table: 1942 -43 in Scottish footbal l]# 8
> 2006 -07 Blackburn -6-2Bolton -
> [Table: Lancashire Senior Cup]# 3
> 2010 -11 Blackburn -1-1Preston -
> [Table: Lancashire Senior Cup]#7
> 2010 -11 Blackburn -1-1Preston -
> [Table: Lancashire Senior Cup]# 3
> Manchester United have won a record 20 League
> titles, 12 FA Cups, 5 League Cups and a record …
> North -Eastern League Cup Aberdeen
> [Table: 1942 -43 in Scottish footbal l]# 8
> 1Manchester City 46 19 3…
> [Table: 2001 -02 Portsmouth F.C. season]# 0
> [Table: 2001 -02 Walsall F.C. season]# 0
> [Table: 1926 -27 Port Vale F.C. season]# 0
> 1Manchester City 46 19 3…
> 2Portsmouth 42 14 4…

… …

… …       

> [Liverpool]
> [Table: Four runners -up teams lost to Manchester United]
> [Accrington Stanley] [Manchester City] [Bolton Wanderers]
> IRCoT (gpt -4o -mini)
> [reasoning] The mention of a logo featuring a
> flower relates to Manchester City, which has a red
> rose in its emblem. Therefore, the runners -up
> that lost to Manchester United in the recent
> Lancashire Senior Cup finals are likely associated
> with this logo.
> [regenerated query] The runners -up with a logo
> featuring a flower that lost to Manchester United
> in the recent finals of the Lancashire Senior Cup
> are Manchester City F.C.
> 100% table rows regarding Lancashire Images of F.C. emblem Mostly Manchester City F.C. regarded Mixed assets regarding football
> Rank 6

Given context  

> Missing evidenc e

Figure 1: Redundancy trap in MMQA. Given a table and three emblems, the goal is to fetch the missing visual evidence ( Bolton Wanderers’s emblem ) to complete the evidence set. (i) Query + Context fail as they trapped by the existing Lancashire Senior Cup context (Semantic Anchoring). Meanwhile, Explicit Rewriting (IRCoT) prematurely concludes the search upon verifying Manchester City ’s record, overlooking the unexamined visual assets. (ii) Query − Context succeeds by implicitly subtracting the covered context features within the embedding space, shifting the search direction toward the unobserved visual target. See Appendix A for another case study. 

language-centric bias misdirects subsequent search iterations toward redundant or irrelevant spaces, proving that explicit textification fails to capture unexamined, complementary multi-modal assets. We introduce GRAIL (Gap-aware Retrieval via 

Adaptive Implicit Localization), a new paradigm for implicit query rewriting within the latent space. Rather than blindly contextualizing existing con-text, the rewritten query consistently shifts toward the unanswered facets of the question, increasing its similarity to missing evidence by subtracting the already covered information from the query. Operating entirely in the embedding space, this mechanism avoids any linguistic loss and enables an efficient, self-correcting retrieval trajectory for complex MMQA. When applied iteratively, it natu-rally supports progressive evidence discovery with-out accumulating semantic bias. The primary contributions are as follows: • Problem Identification : We systematically char-acterize Semantic Anchoring in MMQA, demon-strating how conventional iterative loops suffer from entity-centric redundancy (Figure 1). • Implicit Latent Steering : We propose GRAIL 

that performs context-subtractive query rewriting directly in the latent space, mitigating semantic anchoring in additive retrieval. • Task-Adaptive Hybrid Framework : Based on a comparative analysis of where gap-aware versus additive search excels, we design a hybrid frame-work that dynamically routes queries to handle both evidence aggregation and missing evidence retrieval. • Robust Iterative Retrieval : When applied itera-tively on multimodal evidence, our mechanism constructs high-quality Top-K candidate pools; unlike conventional additive methods prone to compounding errors, GRAIL remains robust to noise and prevents error propagation. 

2 Related Work 

Multimodal Question Answering Early works in MMQA primarily focus on downstream reason-ing or query decomposition under heavily con-strained, "closed-world" environments. Frame-works such as AutoRouting (Talmor et al., 2021), ImplicitDecomp (Talmor et al., 2021), PReasM (Yoran et al., 2022), SKURG (Yang et al., 2023), and RAMQA (Bai et al., 2025) inherently rely on pre-filtered asset pools provided by the dataset metadata, without executing open-domain candi-date retrieval. Even within these oracle-guided pools, PReasM (Yoran et al., 2022) restricts its rea-soning scope to text and table only, while RAMQA 2(Bai et al., 2025) is limited to single-hop QA. Fur-thermore, although MuRAG (Chen et al., 2022) scales to full-wiki image-text corpora, it lacks iter-ative reasoning across heterogeneous modalities. While existing networks excel at localized rea-soning under distractor settings, they do not ex-plicitly address the challenges of open-domain, multimodal, multi-hop retrieval. More recently, frameworks like LILaC (Yun et al., 2025) have introduced explicit LLM-based query decomposi-tion coupled with structural graph traversal. How-ever, since discrete planning systems are vulnerable to cascading planning errors, we execute implicit query steering directly within the embedding space. 

Multi-hop Retrieval Within the text-only do-main, iterative retrieval and query reformulation– such as recursive vector addition in MDR (Xiong et al., 2021), explicit entity expansion in GoldEn (Qi et al., 2019), or LLM-based generation in IR-CoT (Trivedi et al., 2023) and IterDRAG(Yue et al., 2025)–have widely pioneered sequential context construction. However, translating text-centric paradigms into multimodal contexts introduces se-vere bottlenecks. Explicit textification of high-dimensional visual features is computationally ex-pensive, flattens non-verbal cues into rigid key-words, and triggers compounding hallucinations or semantic drift. 

Space Purification We introduce subtractive query steering, conceptually rooted in Rocchio rel-evance feedback (Rocchio, 1971) and its dense re-trieval extensions via contrastive learning and hard negative mining (Karpukhin et al., 2020; Xiong et al., 2020; Izacard et al., 2021). While conven-tional multi-hop methods refine queries through the additive accumulation of retrieved evidence (Xiong et al., 2021), our framework executes on-line, implicit subtraction to dynamically suppress redundant context and prevent semantic drift. Im-portantly, unlike classic Rocchio feedback, it elimi-nates explicit centroid updates or static weighting, learning to purify the multimodal latent space via a differentiable, step-wise gated transformation. 

3 Problem Formulation 

3.1 Evidence Set Completion 

Multimodal multi-hop question answering (MMQA) requires integrating multiple pieces of evidence across diverse modalities to derive a concise answer. In an open-domain setting, this process necessitates retrieving a set of relevant items from a vast, multi-modal corpus C. While previous studies often focus on the downstream reasoning stage, we shift our attention exclusively to the retrieval phase: the fundamental process of gathering the necessary information to enable such multi-hop reasoning. Let q be a query representation and E∗ =

{e1, e 2, . . . , e G} be the gold evidence set required to resolve q. Assuming a partial evidence subset 

Ep ⊂ E ∗ has already been acquired, the retriever’s objective is to identify the missing evidence piece 

et ∈ E ∗ \ E p from C. Unlike standard retrieval paradigms that optimize for individual asset rel-evance in isolation, evidence set completion de-mands a complementary optimization of the candi-date pool. The primary goal is to learn a mapping function f (q, Ep) → q′ that generates a gap-aware, reformulated query, which adaptively suppresses the information components already covered by Ep.

3.2 Sequential Pool Construction 

A practical open-domain MMQA scenario does not provide any partial gold context a priori. There-fore, we extend the single-step completion into a se-quential retrieval task, where the retriever must au-tonomously construct set of evidences Eret (|E ret | =

K) starting from a query-only state ( Ep = ∅). At the initial hop t = 0 , the retriever dispatches 

q to fetch an initial chunk of base evidence Ebase 

of size A (< K ) from the corpus C. The partial evidence set is initialized with this base context, establishing E(0)  

> p

= Ebase . At each subsequent hop 

t ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , T }, the mapping function processes the original query along with the accumulated con-text to formulate an updated retrieval vector: 

q(t) = f (q, E(t−1)  

> p

). (1) This vector is deployed to retrieve a complementary block of evidence B(t) of size M (t). The acquired context is then dynamically expanded via set union: 

E(t) 

> p

= E(t−1)  

> p

∪ B (t). (2) The iterative process terminates when the total accumulated evidence fulfills the remaining slots (PTt=1 M (t) = K − A), yielding the final inte-grated candidate pool Eret = E(T ) 

> p

.As the refinement hops proceed, the trajectory of q(t) must continuously escape the semantic grav-ity of E(t−1)  

> p

to discover novel information gaps, thereby maximizing the density of valid evidence within a limited candidate budget K.34 Methodology 

While our framework executes implicit trajectory steering within a shared latent space, managing this embedding topology reveals foundational structural anomalies. First, multi-hop search paths suffer from Entity-Centric Bias , where dominant entities within the initial query q overwhelm the embedding space, fetching redundant assets with diminishing returns (see Figure 1). While breaking this trap neces-sitates a transition from additive to a subtractive query reformulation, executing such latent feature purification introduces a secondary bottleneck: the 

Invisible Modality Gap . Because semantic redun-dancy often transcends modalities, where informa-tion in one format (e.g., a film script) may offer the same utility as another (e.g., a corresponding video frame), a disjointed embedding space prevents the retriever from detecting covered information. Con-sequently, precise cross-modal alignment is a strict prerequisite for effective feature subtraction. To resolve these limitations, GRAIL operates in two sequential stages: (1) Unified Semantic Alignment (4.1) synchronizes multimodal vector topologies into a consistent embedding space to enable cross-format redundancy evaluation. (2) 

Gap-aware Search Mechanism (4.2) balances ac-quiring novel complementary information with pre-serving the original query relevance, suppressing redundant context features from Ep while maintain-ing the required logical reasoning path for q.

4.1 Unified Semantic Alignment 

The first stage establishes a unified semantic space of text, tables, and images. This alignment is a func-tional prerequisite for the subsequent bi-encoder retrieval, ensuring that evidence from any modal-ity can be compared and operated upon within a consistent vector space. 

Alignment Strategies We evaluate four strate-gies, categorized into two query-independent and two query-dependent options. Query-independent alignments focus on the in-ternal cohesion of the evidence set E∗: (a) Centroid-based minimizes the distance between the mean vector of E∗ and its members, while (b) CLS-based 

utilizes the hidden state of the [CLS] token from the concatenated sequence [[CLS] ; e1; . . . ; eG] as a semantic anchor. Conversely, query-dependent approaches incorporate query information into the alignment process: (c) Query-evidence ex-plicitly maps q to each individual ei ∈ E∗,whereas (d) Query-set processes the joint sequence 

[q; e1; . . . ; eG] to utilize the query token’s final hid-den state as the alignment pivot. These alignment strategies differ only in their definition of the anchor representation. For a batch of size N , let anc x be the designated anchor embed-dings for x-th sample. We optimize an InfoNCE loss to maximize the semantic agreement between this anchor-evidence pairs: 

Lalign = − 1

N

> N

X

> x=1

1

|E ∗ 

> x

|

X

> e∈E ∗
> x

log Px(e)

Px(e) + N x

(3) where Px(e) and Nx denote the intra-chain posi-tive alignment score and inter-chain negative con-trastive score, respectively: 

Px(e) = exp  sim (anc x, e )/τ  (4) 

N x =

> N

X 

> y̸=x

X

> e′∈E ∗
> y

exp  sim (anc x, e ′)/τ  (5) where τ is the temperature parameter and sim (·, ·)

denotes the similarity function (e.g., cosine similar-ity). By switching the formulation of anc , this objec-tive scales across all strategies introduced above. For example, query-evidence strategy (c) simply instantiates the anchor as anc x = qx. This uni-fied formalization provides the multi-modal space with the exact topological precision required before executing the subsequent information subtraction stage. 

4.2 Gap-aware Search Mechanism 

Upon the unified latent space, we build a search mechanism to identify the information gap. Overall process is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

Information Aggregation To represent the knowledge already acquired from Ep, compute a existing knowledge vector hctx :

hctx = LN 

 X

> ei∈E p

αiei

 (6) where the attention weight αi is defined as: 

αi = exp(( ei · q)/√d)

P  

> ej∈E p

exp(( ej · q)/√d) (7) where d is the dimension of the shared latent space. 4Context-Subspace Removal To isolate the miss-ing information, we generate the updated query in-tent via an implicit context-subtractive rewriting of 

q relative to hctx . Unlike the unconstrained trajec-tory expansion of conventional additive search ( q +

hctx ), our learnable gap gate g = σ(Wgap [q; hctx ]) 

dynamically modulates the steering intensity based on the accumulated context: 

qgap = q − g ·

 q · hctx 

∥hctx ∥2



hctx (8) where Wgap ∈ R1×2d and qgap represents the puri-fied query intent for missing evidence. By design, 

g uniformly scales the overlapping context to mit-igate semantic redundancy without distorting the embedding topology. The final retrieval vector hreq is constructed by dynamically mixing qgap and hctx :

hreq = LN (w1qgap + w2hctx ) (9) where the adaptive weights [w1, w 2] are computed as Softmax (Wmix [qgap ; hctx ]) with Wmix ∈ R2×2d.

End-to-End Joint Optimization All compo-nents are optimized jointly and end-to-end without any auxiliary losses or separate heuristics. Because every operation in the gap-aware search mechanism is fully differentiable, the retrieval success signal directly backpropagates to steer these parameters. Specifically, given a training batch of size N , let 

hx 

> req

be the dynamically steered request vector for the x-th query sample, and ext be its corresponding desired evidence. The model is optimized using the multiple negatives ranking loss formulated as: 

LInfoNCE = − 1

N

> N

X

> x=1

log Px

> nce

(ext )

Px

> nce

(ext ) + N x

> nce

(10) where Px

> nce

(ext ) and N x 

> nce

denote the positive re-trieval score and the negative contrastive score for the x-th sample, respectively: 

Px

> nce

(e) = exp  sim (hx

> req

, e )/τ x

> dyn

 (11) 

N x 

> nce

=

> N

X 

> y̸=x

Px

> nce

(eyt )

| {z }

> In-batch negatives

+ X

> z∈Z x

Px

> nce

(z)

| {z }

> Hard distractors

(12) where Zx represents the set of hard multimodal distractors. The retrieval score is calibrated using a dynamic temperature τ x

> dyn

, which automatically regulates how aggressively the network learns from each context. 

4.3 Task-Adaptive Hybrid Framework 

The optimal strategy for retrieval fundamentally diverges across different question categories. For example, certain queries benefit from additive re-inforcement ( hadd req ) to consolidate ongoing context, while others strictly demand subtractive query steer-ing ( hgap req ) to isolate missing information. To exploit these distinct operational advantages, we introduce a Task-Adaptive Hybrid Framework governed by a front-end query selector. By analyzing the incom-ing query q, a lightweight selector Φ( q) ∈ { 0, 1}

pre-determines the most effective specialist frame-work before executing the document search: 

hreq =

(

hadd req , if Φ( q) = 0 

hgap req , if Φ( q) = 1 (13) The selector Φ( q) is a Transformer-based se-quence encoder topped with a linear classifica-tion layer. Independent of the retrieval train-ing, the selector is optimized using a standard cross-entropy loss on a labeled subset Droute =

{(q, label )}, where ground-truth labels are auto-matically mapped based on task metadata (i.e., 

y = 0 for information aggregation tasks, and y = 1 

for specific target isolation tasks). Once trained to distinguish reasoning topologies, the selector parameters are frozen. During inference, this gate acts as a deterministic paradigm switch, structurally enabling task-specialized synergy. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Experimental Setup 5.1.1 Dataset 

We utilize the MultimodalQA benchmark (Talmor et al., 2021); its corpus and dataset statistics are detailed in Appendix B.1 (Table 4 and Table 5). (See Appendix F for WebQA dataset evaluation.) To evaluate the model’s ability to identify the information gap, we reformulate the original Mul-timodalQA into the Evidence Set Completion task. Based on the gold evidence sets E∗, we filter for instances where |E ∗| ≥ 2. Specifically, we expand each question-evidence set pair into multiple test instances by iteratively withholding each evidence item ei ∈ E ∗ as the missing evidence (et = ei)while providing all other items in the set as the con-text (Ep = E∗ \ { et}). This exhaustive leave-one-out approach ensures that the model is evaluated on its ability to retrieve any missing component et

from the full corpus C regardless of the provided context. 55.1.2 Baselines 

Unless specified otherwise, all models are evalu-ated under the Query-evidence alignment (see Ap-pendix B.3 for full implementation details). We compare GRAIL against several competitive alter-natives, ranging from standard dense retrieval to large language model (LLM) query regeneration: • Query Only : A standard dense bi-encoder (DPR-style (Karpukhin et al., 2020)) that retrieves evi-dence solely relying on the original query q.• Additive : The search vector is updated by adding the query and context embeddings, analogous to PRF / Rocchio-style relevance feedback (Roc-chio, 1971) in dense retrieval (see Algorithm 1). • LLM-based Query Regeneration : We adapt text-based multi-hop methods to multimodal settings using gpt-4o-mini (Hurst et al., 2024): 

– Closed-Book Generation : The LLM re-generates a search query based solely on 

q, evaluating the baseline performance of internal parametric knowledge. 

– IRCoT : Adapted from IRCoT (Trivedi et al., 2023), the LLM generates a reasoning trace given q and Ep, where visual assets are fed as raw images. 

– Answer-Augmented Retrieval : The LLM generates an intermediate answer from the context, which is then concatenated to the query (ans ⊕ q). 

5.1.3 Evaluation Metrics 

To evaluate retrieval quality and dissect the inner mechanics, we use two primary performance met-rics and three diagnostic metrics. 

Primary Performance Metrics For Evidence Set Completion (3.1), we utilize Recall@K , mea-suring whether the single missing target evidence 

et is retrieved. (R@ K = I(rank (et) ≤ K).) For Sequential Pool Construction (3.2), we employ Set-Recall@K to quantify the coverage of the candi-date pool Eret against the gold evidence set E∗:Set-Rec @K(Eret ) = |E ret ∩ E ∗||E ∗| . (14) 

Diagnostic Metrics First, to quantify the seman-tic trajectory of retrieval vectors and empirically diagnose the phenomenon of semantic anchoring, we introduce the Semantic Escape Delta ( ∆esc ):

∆esc = sim (q′, e t) − max 

> ei∈E p

sim (q′, e i). (15) A positive ∆esc indicates that the steered query vector has successfully broken out of the seman-tic gravity of the satisfied context Ep toward the unexplored logical void of the missing target et.Second, to evaluate the framework’s capability to maximize the information density of the lim-ited candidate pool, we introduce the Rank Jump (Jump ). Formally, let Eqo denote the top-K ev-idences retrieved solely by the raw query q (cor-responding to the Ebase size of K). The subset of newly included target assets S is formulated as: 

S = ( Eret ∩ E ∗) \ E qo (16) The Rank Jump for a given query q is computed as the mean baseline rank of these elevated assets: 

Jump (q) = 1

|S| 

X

> ei∈S

rank qo (ei) (17) where rank qo (ei) represents the initial rank of asset 

ei under the Query Only retrieval. A higher Jump 

score empirically demonstrates that the model ef-fectively surfaces informative, low-ranked assets into the top-K slots, thereby constructing a highly efficient, information-dense candidate pool. Third, to quantify the self-purifying capacity under adversarial initial states, we introduce the 

Noise-Resilience Margin ( N RM ). We isolate a subset of highly challenging queries, Qn, where 

Ebase contains absolutely zero gold items ( Ebase ∩E∗ = ∅). For this 100% noisy subset, N RM mea-sures the net recall gain achieved by the retrieval model over the Query Only alternative:      

> N RM =1
> |Q n|
> P
> q∈Q n
> 
> Set-Rec @K(Eret )−Set-Rec @K(Eqo )
> 

(18) A positive N RM confirms model’s self-correcting capability; the model successfully limits error prop-agation and prevents the query from veering off in meaning, navigating back to the target assets even when starting from a completely noisy context. 

5.2 Specialization: Anchoring vs. Purification Divergent Performance Patterns Table 1 and Figure 2 reveal a clear functional decoupling: Ad-ditive integration excels in Uni-modal and Intersect 

tasks by acting as a “topic reinforcer” within local-ized semantic domains, but fails significantly in 

Compare and Compose tasks requiring entity tran-sitions or cross-modal leaps (see Appendix C.2 for further analysis). In these reasoning-heavy settings, the Additive model suffers from semantic anchor-ing , where the context locks the search vector and 6Table 1: Evidence Set Completion performance across question types in MultimodalQA. While the additive baseline performs well on localized aggregated tasks ( Uni-modal , Intersect ), GRAIL achieves clear gains on compositional reasoning tasks ( Compose , Com-pare ), additionally supported by the positive ∆esc .                           

> Type Method R@1 R@5 R@10 R@20 ∆esc
> Uni-Additive 37.67 61.00 70.38 77.84 −0.139 GRAIL 21.00 33.94 40.91 46.72 −0.010
> Intersect Additive 23.00 45.71 52.81 61.90 −0.111 GRAIL 14.61 30.70 38.10 46.50 −0.066 Compare Additive 4.28 12.59 16.63 24.47 −0.245
> GRAIL 18.29 33.25 38.72 45.84 +0.046 Compose Additive 7.44 19.38 26.90 33.10 −0.292
> GRAIL 20.31 36.51 42.79 50.00 +0.087

blocks the transition to distinct targets. Conversely, GRAIL dominates these tasks, outperforming the baseline by up to threefold (20.31% vs. 7.44% in 

Compose ). 

Overcoming Semantic Gravity As shown in Ta-ble 1, the Additive model’s ∆esc consistently drops into negative values, indicating that the query rep-resentation is swallowed by the semantic gravity of the satisfied context. Mathematically, simple addi-tion cannot generate a search signal orthogonal to what is already retrieved. Conversely, GRAIL exe-cutes successful semantic purification , maintain-ing a positive escape margin ( +0 .087 in Compose ). By subtracting redundant projections, it creates a repelling force that drives the retrieval vector into the remaining information gap. 

The Hybrid Framework This task-specific spe-cialization highlights the necessity of a hybrid 

Figure 2: Hybrid framework leveraging complemen-tary specialists in MultimodalQA. By dynamically routing each query to the optimal specialist, our hy-brid framework achieves a "best-of-both-worlds" perfor-mance (+40.3% macro avg. gain over Additive). Table 2: Implicit vs. Explicit query modeling per-formance and latency. We evaluated macro-averaged recall across the MultimodalQA validation split (2,724 data, q_type ∈{Compare, Compose, Intersect}). Our GRAIL & Hybrid consistently outperform both the addi-tive baseline and explicit query regeneration baselines.                                         

> Method R@1 R@3 R@5 R@10 Latency
> Query Only 16.24 32.68 40.51 48.54 2–5 ms
> Explicit Query Generation
> Closed-Book 13.78 26.89 34.65 42.69 0.6–1.0 s IRCoT 13.42 24.87 30.18 36.21 1.1–1.6 s Ans-Augmented 16.54 33.24 39.96 48.86 1.2–1.8 s
> Implicit Vector Steering
> Additive 11.57 25.89 32.11 39.82 2–5 ms GRAIL 17.74 33.49 39.87 47.45 3–6 ms
> Hybrid (ours) 20.53 38.49 44.77 52.58 3–6 ms

framework that routes queries based on reason-ing requirements. We train two distinct specialist– each optimized exclusively for their respective top-performing question type–and integrate them via a learned query router, which achieves an accuracy of 97.71% (F1-score: 0.98) on the validation split. Consequently, this dynamic assignment yields a 

+6.2pp gain in micro average R@1 (Figure 2). 

5.3 Effectiveness of Implicit Query Steering 

Table 2 compares our implicit update models with explicit baselines relying on LLM-generated text queries. While methods like IRCoT attempt to trace human-like reasoning, they suffer from a lin-guistic bottleneck. In multimodal settings, translat-ing high-dimensional visual features into discrete text tokens triggers semantic loss; rich, non-verbal cues are compressed into a few keywords, failing to capture the subtle relational information. Further-more, the poor performance of Closed-Book and IRCoT–even fall behind the Query Only baseline– demonstrates that explicit text generation can act as a semantic distractor . Inaccurate textual synthesis misdirects the search agent, proving that implicit vector steering directly within the embedding space is fundamentally more robust than error-prone tex-tual translations (see Figure 1 and Appendix A for qualitative case studies). 

5.4 Achieving Extended Effective Top-K

To evaluate practical efficiency in a realistic pipeline, we analyze sequential pool construction strategies where the evidence pool is built from scratch without relying on oracle context. Table 3 7Table 3: Granular efficiency under various step con-figurations ( K = 10 ). Performance changes are rel-ative to the Query Only baseline; Jump values are re-ported as mean (90th percentile). Results demonstrate that sequential GRAIL outperforms both static additive interpolation and single-shot retrieval, effectively com-pensating for the scarcity of initial context.                                       

> Steps Set-Rec@10 Jump (90%) NRM
> Query Only
> 10 44.69% –Ebase ∩ E ∗=∅
> Additive
> 5+5 −3.08pp 20.3 (33.0) −4.36pp
> 3+7 −4.13pp 28.3 (46.4) −5.20pp
> GRAIL (Ours)
> 8+1+1 +1.99pp 30.1 (52.0) +2.78pp
> 8+2 +1.92pp 30.2 (51.0) +2.72pp
> 5+5 +0.96pp 34.4 (66.2) +2.74pp
> 3+7 +0.22pp 34.2 (65.2) +1.75pp
> 3+3+4 +1.32pp 34.6 (58.4) +2.89pp
> 3+2+3+2 +2.00pp 30.3 (54.5) +3.94pp
> 2*5 +1.80pp 32.5 (59.0) +3.64pp
> 1*10 +1.48pp 32.9 (67.1) +2.30pp

breaks down these behaviors for K = 10 . Each strategies denotes the step-wise retrieval slice sizes (e.g., 3+7 indicates retrieving 3 assets as the base, then 7 in the next turn). 

Efficiency Amplification The behavior of the Jump metric in Table 3 demonstrates a substantial expansion of the effective search horizon. Across all configurations, GRAIL successfully retrieves complementary evidence originally ranked be-tween the 30th and 35th positions in the baseline pool (mean Jump ≈ 30–34). This dynamic implies that sequential information subtraction allows a compressed pool of size K = 10 to achieve the coverage and search depth equivalent to a three-fold larger Query Only pool. Consequently, our framework offers a resource-efficient alternative that consistently improves gold evidence coverage within a restricted budget, reducing downstream context overhead. 

Robustness in Noise-Heavy Environments The NRM in Table 3 evaluates framework stability when the initial pool contains zero gold evidence and is entirely polluted by distractors. Under such noise, traditional paradigms–such as addi-tive rewriting or explicit query regeneration–suffer from error propagation; irrelevant initial documents aggressively mislead subsequent retrieval turns. In contrast, our framework utilizes projection-based residual subtraction, bypassing fragile tex-tual rewriting. By tracking uncovered information directly within the embedding space, the model 

Figure 3: Robustness of GRAIL vs. Additive models under iterative slicing. Set-Recall(%) is plotted against the number of retrieval slices in MultimodalQA for K = 10 (left) and K = 20 (right). Although the Ad-ditive baseline exhibits strength in specific single-stage question types (Table 1), it suffers from rapid perfor-mance decay under iterative configurations due to error accumulation (see Appendix D for extended analysis). 

maintains structural robustness even when the ini-tial step is completely blind, achieving a peak ro-bustness gain of +3.94pp under 3+2+3+2 strategy. 

5.5 Analysis of Pre-alignment Spaces 

We analyze how cross-modal alignment topologies and training regimes affect latent steering. While query-independent spaces require full fine-tuning (FT) due to coarse feature subtraction, query-dependent approaches perform optimally when frozen, as full FT disrupts pre-aligned semantic boundaries. Crucially, the Query-evidence align-ment strikes the best balance–capturing precise lo-cal contexts while preserving pre-aligned semantic boundaries and yielding a positive ∆esc . In contrast, 

Query-set alignment suffers from grain-dilution, collapsing localized precision. Consequently, we establish Query-evidence as our default topology. We provide full empirical results and deeper theo-retical implications in Appendix C. 

6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we addressed Semantic Anchoring in MMQA retrieval, where conventional additive methods suffer from entity-centric redundancy. To overcome this, we introduced GRAIL, an implicit context-subtractive query rewriting mechanism op-erating directly in the shared latent space with-out error-prone textification. Moreover, our Hy-brid Framework dynamically routes queries to task-specific specialists to maximize baseline synergies. Extensive evaluations on MultimodalQA confirm that GRAIL expands the effective search horizon, demonstrates robust noise-resilience, and outper-forms explicit query generation baselines. 8Limitations 

While our proposed framework demonstrates sig-nificant efficacy and robustness in implicit latent steering for multimodal multi-hop retrieval, we ac-knowledge several limitations that open avenues for future work. 

Fixed Step Scheduling In our iterative retrieval experiments (Section 5.4), we explored a variety of fixed partitioning strategies (e.g., 3+2+3+2 , 5+5 )rather than dynamically adjusting the step sizes during runtime. While this structured scheduling ensures predictable latency and bypasses the com-putational overhead of an online decision loop, it does not adaptively recalibrate based on the com-plexity of an individual query. Developing an end-to-end dynamic step controller that infers the op-timal stopping criterion per hop remains an open challenge. 

Lack of Generative Answer Synthesis Our framework focuses strictly on the retrieval and ev-idence set completion phases of the multimodal multi-hop pipeline. Unlike explicit LLM-based query generation frameworks that end-to-end syn-thesize final natural language answers, our model is designed as a highly parameter-efficient retrieval accelerator. While it drastically reduces context window overhead and provides clean evidence pools, integrating this implicit steering mechanism with a generative downstream reader to produce comprehensive multimodal answers is left for fu-ture engineering. 

Scalability to Open-Ended Web Environments 

Although our empirical evaluations comprehen-sively cover both standard benchmarks and deep multi-hop scenarios (extending to 3+ hops), our projection-based subtraction has primarily been verified within bounded knowledge corpora. Scalability to open-ended, web-scale retrieval environments–where the density of distractors in-creases exponentially and the modality drift is more severe–remains an active area of investigation. 

References 

Yang Bai, Christan Grant, and Daisy Zhe Wang. 2025. Ramqa: A unified framework for retrieval-augmented multi-modal question answering. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 1061–1076. Wenhu Chen, Hexiang Hu, Xi Chen, Pat Verga, and William Cohen. 2022. Murag: Multimodal retrieval-augmented generator for open question answering over images and text. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 5558–5570. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understand-ing. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of the association for com-putational linguistics: human language technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers) , pages 4171–4186. OpenAI Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P. Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark, AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Rad-ford, Aleksander Mkadry, Alex Baker-Whitcomb, Alex Beutel, Alex Borzunov, Alex Carney, Alex Chow, Alexander Kirillov, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, and 397 others. 2024. Gpt-4o system card. Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Se-bastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, and Edouard Grave. 2021. Unsupervised dense in-formation retrieval with contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09118 .Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oguz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) , pages 6769–6781. Peng Qi, Xiaowen Lin, Leo Mehr, Zijian Wang, and Christopher D Manning. 2019. Answering complex open-domain questions through iterative query gen-eration. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing and the 9th international joint conference on natu-ral language processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2590–2602. Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, and 1 others. 2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PmLR. J. J. Rocchio. 1971. Relevance feedback in information retrieval. Alon Talmor, Ori Yoran, Amnon Catav, Dan Lahav, Yizhong Wang, Akari Asai, Gabriel Ilharco, Han-naneh Hajishirzi, and Jonathan Berant. 2021. Multi-modal{qa}: complex question answering over text, tables and images. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2023. Interleaving retrieval 

9with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 10014–10037, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Shitao Xiao, Zheng Liu, Peitian Zhang, and Niklas Muennighoff. 2023. C-pack: Packaged resources to advance general chinese embedding. Preprint ,arXiv:2309.07597. Lee Xiong, Chenyan Xiong, Ye Li, Kwok-Fung Tang, Jialin Liu, Paul Bennett, Junaid Ahmed, and Arnold Overwijk. 2020. Approximate nearest neighbor neg-ative contrastive learning for dense text retrieval.       

> arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.00808 .Wenhan Xiong, Xiang Lorraine Li, Srinivasan Iyer, Jingfei Du, Patrick Lewis, William Yang Wang, Yashar Mehdad, Wen-tau Yih, Sebastian Riedel, Douwe Kiela, and Barlas O˘ guz. 2021. Answer-ing complex open-domain questions with multi-hop dense retrieval. International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Qian Yang, Qian Chen, Wen Wang, Baotian Hu, and Min Zhang. 2023. Enhancing multi-modal multi-hop question answering via structured knowledge and unified retrieval-generation. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia ,pages 5223–5234. Ori Yoran, Alon Talmor, and Jonathan Berant. 2022. Turning tables: Generating examples from semi-structured tables for endowing language models with reasoning skills. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6016–6031, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Zhenrui Yue, Honglei Zhuang, Aijun Bai, Kai Hui, Rolf Jagerman, Hansi Zeng, Zhen Qin, Dong Wang, Xu-anhui Wang, and Michael Bendersky. 2025. Infer-ence scaling for long-context retrieval augmented generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pages 72914–72938. Joohyung Yun, Doyup Lee, and Wook-Shin Han. 2025. Lilac: Late interacting in layered component graph for open-domain multimodal multihop retrieval. In
> Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 20551–20570.

A Additional Qualitative Case Study 

To further illustrate the practical mechanics of GRAIL, we provide a detailed visualization of a representative multi-hop retrieval trajectory (Fig-ure 4). The selected query requires comparing the urban areas of Pontarlier and another city de-picted in an image featuring a statue and multiple fountains( Lons-le-Saunier . To successfully resolve this example, the retriever faces a distinct cross-modal bottleneck: it must correctly identify the visual asset as Lons-le-Saunier while simultane-ously retrieving the target structured table ( Princi-pal cities of Franche-Comté ) containing the precise metrics for both cities. When analyzing the latent space and Top-10 retrieval composition for this specific trajectory, conventional paradigms suffer severely from em-bedding distortion. For instance, in the Query Only setting, while explicitly searching for “Pon-tarlier” pulls the missing table row of Pontarlier, the complete absence of visual context forces the model to anchor on superficial keywords such as 

fountains, statue, or cities . This populates the top ranks with irrelevant international city images. Sim-ilarly, blindly adding the context image embedding (Query + Context ) amplifies the modality bias; the search manifold becomes 100% dominated by image representations, completely paralyzing the model’s table retrieval capabilities. Even with Explicit Rewriting (IRCoT via GPT-4o-mini), a confirmation bias emerges. Instead of recognizing that the entire structured frame–the list of principal cities of Franche-Comté –is missing and guiding the search toward that global layout, the LLM deduces the final answer using its internal knowledge. It then regenerates an over-confident, verbose query specifically designed to justify this early conclusion. While this predictive shortcut manages to fetch the two local target rows (Lons-le-Saunier at 10th and Pontarlier at 16th), the con-versational nature of the generated query introduces unnecessary noise, still retrieving a large number of irrelevant international city images within the Top-10 ranks. More importantly, rather than rec-ognizing the global context of the Franche-Comté 

table as the primary search target, this paradigm remains heavily entity-centric. By locking into a predicted entity instead of capturing the broader table layout, it deprives the model of any opportu-nity to self-correct when its internal knowledge is flawed, potentially leading to a failure in delivering accurate, evidence-based reasoning. In contrast, our context-subtractive approach (Query - Context ) successfully redirects the query embedding toward the missing evidence. By sub-tracting the visual features of the context, GRAIL eliminates the dominating image-modality bias, allowing the table modality to dominate the top ranks (70% table rows) and pulling adjacent rows 10 City Metropolitan area Urban area City proper             

> Lons -le -Saunier 58,674 26,894 17,459
> Montbéliard 160,671 106,486 25,336
> Belfort 114,445 81,651 49,519
> …
> Pontarlier 30,895 21,760 17,140

Top -10 Composition 

• Query Only: random international city images (Pontarlier Table row, Oristano Image, Alagón Image … )       

> àExplicit inclusion of “Pontarlier” in query successfully retrieves the Pontarlier table row. However, due to the complete absence of visual information, the model gets dragged by superficial
> lexical tokens (e.g., fountains, statue, cities) , causing random European city images to clutter the top ranks.

• Query + Context: 100% image modality (Oristano Image, Kraków Image … )   

> àAmplifies modality bias, completely paralyzing the table retrieval capability.

• Query ‒ Context: 70% table rows (Pontarlier Table row, Saint -Claude Table row, Ramallah Table row … )           

> àSubtraction operation eliminates the image bias , allowing table modality to dominate the top ranks. It also successfully pulls adjacent rows from the same table (principal cities of Franche -
> Comte) onto the manifold. However, subtracting the visual features of Lons -le -Saunier partially erases its semantic meanings as well , pushing regarding table row down to 91st (over -
> subtraction).

• IRCoT (gpt -4o -mini ): random international city images and table rows (Oristano Image, Piura Image, Saint -Claude Table row, … , Lons -le -Saunier Table row, … ) 

> [regenerated query]

The city mentioned in your context is Lons -le -Saunier, which is known for its multiple fountains at the base of a statue. When comparing the urban areas of Pontarlier and Lons -le -

Saunier, Pontarlier has a lower urban area.            

> àThe model successfully recognizes the image and leverages its internal knowledge to reason which city is smaller. While this textual anchor pulls the Lons -le -Saunier row to 10th, the verbose
> conversational noise still floods the search space with random European images ,lowering Pontarlier row to 16th .

Context  

> [Image: Lons -le -Saunier]

Missing Evidence Figure 4: Additional Case Study. Given an image of Lons-le-Saunier, the goal is to fetch the missing table evidence (the list of principal cities of Franche-Comte ) to complete the evidence set. 

from the target Franche-Comté table. However, this case also uncovers a nuanced over-subtraction 

phenomenon: while the operation successfully sur-faces the relevant table structure, erasing the visual features of Lons-le-Saunier partially weakens its semantic representation, meaning the missing Lons-le-Saunier row is not yet sufficiently pulled into the Top-10 ranks (remaining at the 91st rank). Rather than a failure, we highlight the potential of an iterative retrieval paradigm. Since the sub-tractive steering successfully establishes the correct global table layout on the embedding space, these newly retrieved multi-hop evidence sets can serve as a powerful stepping stone for subsequent iter-ations. By leveraging this structured foundation in the next retrieval loop, the model can naturally recover the weakened local entities, progressively narrowing the semantic gap without introducing conversational or modality bias. 

B Detailed Experiments Setup 

B.1 Detailed MultimodalQA Statistics 

Detailed statistics of the MultimodalQA bench-mark (Talmor et al., 2021) splits used in this work are summarized in Table 4 and Table 5. 

Table 4: Statistics of the MultimodalQA corpus. 

Modality Text Table Image Total Count 218,285 144,407 57,058 419,750 

Table 5: Statistics of the MultimodalQA question type. Unique QIDs are expanded into Total Inst. via our leave-one-out approach. 

Q_Type Train Val Test Total 

Uni-modal 3,182 365 409 3,956 Intersect 1,069 161 149 1,379 Compare 1,317 165 159 1,641 Compose 4,964 625 600 6,189 

Unique QIDs 10,532 1,316 1,317 13,165 

Total Inst. 31,095 3,929 4,024 39,048 

B.2 Pseudocode of Implicit Query Rewriting 

Given the raw query q and the currently acquired partial evidence set Ep, the procedure first aggre-gates existing knowledge into a context vector hctx 

via explicit attention routing (Eq. 6). It then dy-namically computes the learnable gap gate g to modulate the intensity of the projection-based sub-traction, purifying the raw query into a gap-aware representation qgap (Eq. 8). Finally, the frame-work applies a lightweight mixing module Wmix 

to dynamically balance qgap and hctx , returning the calibrated request vector hreq alongside the dynam-ically adjusted scaling temperature τdyn for end-to-end alignment calibration. 11 Algorithm 1 Gap-aware Subtractive Search 

Require: Query q, Partial evidence set Ep

Ensure: Refined request vector hreq , Dynamic temperature τdyn 

1: Vp ← { E(ei) | ei ∈ E p}

2: hctx ← Attention (q, V p)

3: if Gap-aware (ours) then 

4: g ← σ(Wgap [q; hctx ]) 

5: qgap ← q − g · F (hctx )

6: [w1, w 2] ← Softmax (Wmix [qgap ; hctx ]) 

7: hreq ← LN (w1qgap + w2hctx )

8: τdyn ← exp(log τbase + MLP ([ q; hctx ])) 

9: else if Additive (baseline) then 

10: hreq ← LN (q + LN (hctx )) 

11: τdyn ← τbase 

12: end if 

13: return hreq , τ dyn 

B.3 Implementation Details 

For the unified latent space, we employ BGE-large-en-v1.5 (Xiao et al., 2023) to embed questions, text passages, and table rows. Images are embedded using CLIP ViT-B/32 (Radford et al., 2021). All embeddings are projected into a shared latent space of dimension d = 1024 . We train the retrieval model using the AdamW optimizer with a batch size of 32, 100 epochs, and a learning rate of 1e−4.The base temperature τbase is set to 0.05 . All ex-periments are conducted on NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPUs. The selector Φ( q) is instantiated using a bert-base-uncased backbone (Devlin et al., 2019) fine-tuned independently for 3 epochs with a learn-ing rate of 1e − 5.

C Detailed Alignment Strategies Analysis 

This section extends the empirical evaluation of Section 4.1 by providing a comprehensive analy-sis of the interaction between cross-modal align-ment topologies, training regimes ( Frz vs. FT ), and downstream task complexities. 

C.1 Cross-Examination of Training Regimes 

Table 6 presents the complete grid search across all alignment strategies and training configurations. The empirical behavior of query-independent ap-proaches ( None , Centroid , CLS ) further confirms that optimizing for internal evidence set cohesion alone is insufficient for multi-modal alignment. Re-lying solely on intra-chain similarity or static aggre-gation ( Centroid , CLS ) lacks a definitive semantic CENTROID A                     

> CENTROID B
> Image
> Text
> contrastive penalty from negative anchor
> pull to anchor
> CENTROID C
> Image
> Text
> contrastive penalty from negative anchor
> pull to anchor
> [Q A]
> [Q B]
> [Q C]
> !A;#!;#";##; … ; #$
> Transformer
> [Q A]
> TOKEN B
> Image
> Text
> contrastive penalty from negative anchor
> pull to anchor
> TOKE NA
> TOKEN C
> [CLS]
> [CLS]
> [CLS]
> [CLS]; "!;"";"#; … ; "$
> Transformer
> [CLS]
> QUERY A
> QUERY B
> Image
> Text
> pull to anchor
> Query
> QUERY C
> contrastive penalty from negative anchor
> (a) (b)
> (c) (d)

Figure 5: Taxonomy of cross-modal semantic align-ment. Top row shows query-independent approaches: (a) Centroid-based alignment, (b) CLS-based alignment. Bottom row shows query-dependent approaches: (c) Query-evidence alignment, (d) Query-set alignment. Table 6: Retrieval performance of gap-aware mecha-nism across different alignment strategies in Multi-modalQA. Full empirical comparison across all cross-modal topologies under both frozen and fine-tuned train-ing regimes. ( FT : full fine-tuning, Frz : frozen back-bones). 

Alignment R@1 R@5 R@20 R@50 ∆esc 

None Frz 0.48 10.33 25.55 31.13 −0.011 

FT 8.35 22.88 42.25 50.04 +0.043 

Centroid Frz 0.74 12.90 33.42 41.84 −0.147 

FT 5.17 19.70 37.77 44.62 −0.210 CLS Frz 0.74 12.93 36.01 45.13 −0.162 

FT 6.11 19.67 35.00 41.94 −0.180 Query-evidence Frz 15.68 31.15 47.85 58.34 +0.007 

FT 8.30 21.63 34.56 42.22 −0.034 Query-set Frz 4.50 24.43 48.97 60.52 −0.136 

FT 4.40 22.47 46.65 53.35 −0.149 

anchor to justify why disparate modalities should co-exist within the same evidence chain. Without a central medium to synthesize these cross-modal fragments, frozen setups ( Frz ) yield near-zero per-formance (e.g., R@1 of 0.48% for None and 0.74% for both Centroid and CLS ), requiring full fine-tuning ( FT ) to forcefully warp the unconditioned representations into task-relevant boundaries. In contrast, our query-dependent formulations introduce the query as an explicit semantic medium. Rather than blindly pushing text, tables, and im-ages together, strategies like Query-evidence lever-age the query to explicitly contextualize why these specific cross-modal segments belong to the same evidence chain. Consequently, when this already optimized space undergoes full fine-tuning ( FT ), it triggers severe overfitting and representation drift instead of further adaptation. As evidenced by the 

Query-evidence R@1 dropping drastically from 12 Figure 6: Model specialization by task complexity in MultimodalQA. Additive models excel in Uni-modal lookup, while Gap-aware models dominate reasoning-heavy tasks (Compare, Compose). This performance gap remains consistent across alignment architectures. 

15.68% to 8.30% (with ∆esc turning to −0.034 ), full parameter updates break the highly precise, cross-modal arrangements Therefore, as estab-lished in our main experiments (Section 5.5), we evaluate each alignment style under its respective optimal training regime ( FT for query-independent and Frz for query-dependent settings) to conduct a follow-up analysis. 

C.2 Alignment Adaptability by Question Type 

To analyze how alignment strategies interact with specific question characteristics, Figure 6 breaks down the performance across distinct question cate-gories (Uni-modal, Intersect, Compare, Compose). The results reveal a clear architectural specializa-tion rooted in the type of reasoning required: • Localized Aggregation Tasks (Uni-modal, Intersect): The conventional Additive baseline consistently outperforms, peaking at 35.0% recall in Uni-modal queries. These tasks pri-marily rely on single-modality lookups or lo-calized information aggregation where repre-sentation fusion is sufficient. In these envi-ronments, our subtractive steering introduces unnecessary geometric disruption to vectors that are already optimal for concentrated en-tity matching. • Compositional Reasoning Tasks (Compare, Compose): Our Gap-aware mechanism dom-inates the baseline, achieving 18.2% accu-racy in Compare (vs. 3.4% for Additive) and 19.5% in Compose (vs. 7.8% for Additive). Because these tasks demand genuine compo-sitional cross-modal reasoning–where infor-mation across disparate modalities and dis-tinct entities must be cross-referenced without redundancy–GRAIL successfully isolates the missing semantic fragments where additive methods fail. By observing the distinct behavior of each align-ment strategy across these tasks, we propose sev-eral hypotheses regarding how vector space con-straints impact retrieval. Specifically, for Uni-modal queries, the Addi-tive baseline exhibits a sharp upward trajectory that explicitly peaks at the Query-evidence stage, reaching its highest accuracy of 35.0%. Since Uni-modal tasks can be resolved entirely within a single modality, the retrieval space does not re-quire complex multi-modal bridging. In this con-text, Query-evidence provides the clean lexical-to-semantic alignment needed to guide the additive vector update straight toward the target zone within specific modality. Conversely, for Intersect queries, the Additive architecture achieves its performance plateau at the query-independent Centroid and CLS stages, but experiences a significant drop down to 20.7% at the 

Query-evidence stage. We hypothesize that Inter-sect tasks inherently require capturing the over-lapping intersection across disparate modalities. Query-independent pre-alignment naturally com-pacts these heterogeneous text, table, and image as-sets into a dense, shared cross-modal cluster before-hand, making it easy for a simple additive update to fuse the multi-modal evidence. However, be-cause the Query-evidence strategy focuses strictly on mapping the query to each asset individually, it fails to bind the disparate modalities to one an-other. This lack of direct cross-modal cohesion isolates the assets from each other, fracturing the dense cluster structure and making localized in-formation aggregation for Intersect queries much more difficult. Conversely, in the Compare task, while query-independent methods severely degrade re-trieval, the query-dependent Query-evidence strat-egy yields a powerful performance spike. This behavior indicates that comparison tasks inherently require query-centric alignment rather than inter-asset correlations. Because the target assets often share no intrinsic relationship other than being re-13 Figure 7: Set Recall across varying pool sizes ( K).     

> The leftmost dashed segment represents the initial Base (Query Only) retrieval, while subsequent segments il-lustrate cumulative gains from the sequential execu-tion of iterative GRAIL slices (e.g., [3+2]*2 denotes a3(base)+2+3+2 step sequence, darkening chronolog-ically). Across all pool sizes, our iterative framework consistently expands retrieval coverage, demonstrating sustained gains even as the retrieval constraints scale.

quested by the same query, forcing query-free clus-ters groups them by irrelevant modal or thematic similarities, making it highly counterproductive for reasoning. In contrast, the Query-evidence strategy successfully maps each asset directly to the query, providing the clean contrastive space needed to compare distinct entities. Finally, the Compose task uncovers a unique phenomenon: the unaligned None setup yields the highest accuracy for the gap-aware mecha-nism, while among the pre-aligned alternatives, performance peaks at Query-evidence . This behav-ior likely stems from representation collapse dur-ing the alignment phase. Because compositional queries require assembling open-ended evidence fragments, forcing a structured alignment objec-tive shifts the representations toward rigid cluster centers. This restriction compresses the semantic flexibility needed to link disparate pieces of evi-dence. While the unaligned ( None ) space preserves this flexibility intact for subtractive isolation, the item-level granularity of the Query-evidence con-figuration serves as the optimal alternative among the aligned models by minimizing global spatial distortion. 

D Detailed Analysis on Iterative Retrieval 

Figure 7 illustrates the overall retrieval recall across different total pool sizes ( K ∈ { 10 , 20 , 50 }). Our gap-aware iterative strategy consistently yields ro-           

> Figure 8: Breakdown of additional retrieval gains by question type. The bars represent the isolated in-crease in Set-Recall contributed exclusively by the 7 ad-ditional evidence pieces retrieved after the initial Query Only baseline (Base 3). Note that the baseline recall at Base 3 is omitted, plotting only the net incremental gain captured during the remaining sequential rescue steps (partitioning scheme 3+2+3+2 ). All values represent the percentage point (%pp) improvement, mapping the distinct behavior of the static Query Only baseline, the
> Additive model, and our Gap-Aware mechanism across the four question categories of MultimodalQA dataset.

bust gains over the baseline across all expanded budgets ( +2.00%p for Top-10, +2.16%p for Top-20, and +2.38%p for Top-50). To investigate the dynamic behavior of multi-hop retrieval across distinct question categories, Figure 8 illustrates the incremental Set-Recall@10 gains achieved exclusively during the sequential rescue steps (partitioning scheme 3+2+3+2 ). The results show that our GRAIL consistently delivers the highest retrieval gains across all task types ex-cept Uni-modal. Particularly in the Compare cate-gory, GRAIL outperforms the Query Only baseline by 4.5pp and the Additive model by 11.2pp .This stark gap stems from the Additive frame-work’s inherent vulnerability to retrieval noise. When irrelevant or noisy assets are captured in the initial retrieval phase, the additive model continu-ously accumulates these corrupted contexts into the updated query vector. Consequently, no matter how many iterative steps are executed, the expanded query remains heavily distorted by the embedded noise, failing to retrieve the actual missing entities. In contrast, our subtractive operator successfully shielding the query from accumulated noise and shifting the search focus toward the remaining se-mantic gaps. An identical vulnerability directly accounts for the performance decay observed under iterative re-trieval regimes. While the Additive approach is 14 Table 7: Distribution of gating coefficients and mix-ing weights on MultimodalQA. Values are reported as mean (standard deviation) on the MultimodalQA vali-dation set. Across all question categories, the mixing weight w1 consistently converges near 1.000 with near-zero variance, indicating that the framework universally prioritizes the isolated semantic gap ( qgap ) over the ex-isting context restoration.            

> Category Gate gWeight w1Weight w2
> Uni-model 0.267 (0 .089) 1 .000 (0 .001) 0 .000 (0 .001)
> Intersect 0.286 (0 .098) 1 .000 (0 .000) 0 .000 (0 .000)
> Compare 0.311 (0 .082) 1 .000 (0 .000) 0 .000 (0 .000)
> Compose 0.303 (0 .084) 1 .000 (0 .001) 0 .000 (0 .001)
> Overall 0.288 (0 .091) 1 .000 (0 .001) 0 .000 (0 .001)

known to perform well when initialized with clean, partial gold evidence (Evidence Set Completion), its performance collapses in realistic setups that start from unverified Query Only baselines (Se-quential Pool Construction). Without the guarantee of gold context, the additive fusion absorbs ini-tial retrieval errors, whereas GRAIL yields stable, superior improvements by strictly isolating the re-maining semantic gaps without amplifying noise. 

E Ablation Study 

To understand the inner workings of GRAIL, we analyze the behavior of the dynamic gating coef-ficient ( g) and the mixing weights ( w1, w 2) across different question categories, followed by an abla-tion study removing the dynamic mixing module (Wmix ). 

Analysis on Gating and Weight Distributions 

Table 7 provides a detailed statistical breakdown of the learned parameters. The dynamic gating coeffi-cient g maintains an overall average of 0.288, with slightly higher activation in compositional cross-modal reasoning tasks such as Compare (0.311) and Compose (0.303). This confirms that the model actively modulates the intensity of the subtractive operation based on the reasoning depth required. The learned mixing weights exhibit an extreme and highly consistent distribution: across all cate-gories, w1 converges directly to 1.000 with a stan-dard deviation of ≤ 0.001 , while w2 effectively re-mains at 0.000. Originally, the mixing layer Wmix 

was introduced to regularize the updated query vec-tor, acting as a logical anchor by blending the sat-urated context ( hctx ) back to maintain reasoning continuity. However, the empirical results show that the model universally assigns near-zero weight, allocating its full attention to the isolated seman-tic gap ( qgap ). This absolute convergence indicates that the subtractive vector steering mechanism is structurally sufficient to drive the retrieval process independently, rendering the additive restoration of 

hsat largely redundant. 

Table 8: Evidence Set Completion performance with and without dynamic mixing. Recall metrics ( R@k)are reported in percentages (%). Both configurations yield highly comparable results across most task cat-egories, aligning with the weight distribution analysis where the mixing weight w1 naturally converges near 1.000.                                               

> Category Model R@1 R@5 R@10 R@20 DC-Gap
> Uni-model Ours 21.00 33.94 40.91 46.72 −0.010
> w/o Wmix 20.91 33.44 40.83 49.05 −0.013
> Intersect Ours 14.61 30.70 38.10 46.50 −0.066
> w/o Wmix 14.12 31.69 39.29 47.98 −0.066
> Compare Ours 18.29 33.25 38.72 45.84 +0 .046
> w/o Wmix 17.81 32.54 39.43 46.79 +0 .041
> Compose Ours 20.31 36.51 42.79 50.00 +0 .087
> w/o Wmix 20.08 35.81 43.41 49.77 +0 .076

Table 9: Sequencial Pool Construction performance comparison between GRAIL (ours) and without Wmix 

on the MultimodalQA dataset. Improvements in Set-Recall@10 and Noise-Resilience Margin (NRM) are relative to the Query Only model (44.69% Set-Rec@10). Rank Jump values and their standard deviations are formatted as mean (std.dev.).                                                        

> Model Steps Set-Rec@10 Jump NRM Ours 8+1+1 +1.99pp 30.1 (40.5) +2.78pp
> w/o Wmix 8+1+1 +1.71pp 28.4 (38.2) +2.50pp
> Ours 5+5 +0.96pp 34.4 (51.9) +2.74pp w/o Wmix 5+5 +1.39pp 32.8 (51.1) +3.46pp Ours 3+7 +0.22pp 34.2 (51.9) +1.75pp w/o Wmix 3+7 +0.27pp 33.2 (51.3) +2.03pp Ours 3+3+4 +1.32pp 34.6 (54.8) +2.89pp
> w/o Wmix 3+3+4 +1.17pp 31.6 (52.5) +2.67pp
> Ours 3+2+3+2 +2.00pp 30.3 (38.7) +3.94pp
> w/o Wmix 3+2+3+2 +1.76pp 33.5 (46.8) +3.66pp
> Ours 1*10 +1.48pp 32.9 (43.1) +2.30pp
> w/o Wmix 1*10 +1.68pp 30.9 (41.4) +2.18pp

Impact of Removing Dynamic Mixing To eval-uate the necessity of the dynamic mixing mod-ule, Table 8 and Table 9 compare the full GRAIL framework against the subtraction-only variant (w/o W mix , where w1 = 1 ). Consistent with our analysis on the weight distri-butions where w1 naturally converges near 1.000, 15 both configurations yield highly comparable per-formance across most retrieval settings. In Ev-idence Set Completion task (Table 8), remov-ing Wmix causes marginal fluctuations but main-tains comparable performance, confirming that 

qgap alone carries the core retrieval signal. Sim-ilarly, in Sequential Pool Construction (Table 9), the subtraction-only baseline closely tracks or oc-casionally matches the full model’s performance in alternate partitioning schemes like 5+5 or 3+7. Nevertheless, because the full GRAIL frame-work consistently achieves the best overall per-formance in dense retrieval steps (e.g., yielding the highest peak of +2.00pp in the 3+2+3+2 Set-Rec@10), we retain the dynamic mixing module as our primary configuration for reporting the main results. 

F Generalization on WebQA 

To verify the dataset-agnostic scalability of our framework, we evaluate GRAIL on the WebQA dataset, a large-scale multimodal retrieval bench-mark (Corpus statistics detailed in Table 10 and Table 11). Distinct from MultimodalQA requiring complex cross-modal fusion per query, WebQA serves as a unified multimodal corpus consisting of separate text and image modalities, where each question focuses on retrieving multiple images or multiple text snippets scattered across the hetero-geneous collection. 

Table 10: Statistics of the WebQA corpus.       

> Modality Text Image Total Count 666,998 389,740 1,056,738

First, the learned parameter distributions on We-bQA (Table 12) tightly echo our findings on Multi-modalQA: the dynamic mixing weight w1 univer-sally converges to 1.000 with near-zero standard deviations ( ≤ 0.005 ) across all query types. This absolute convergence reinforces our core geomet-ric hypothesis that the isolated semantic gap ( qgap )dominates the retrieval space independently. Fur-thermore, the pre-alignment evaluation (Table 13) confirms that the frozen Query-evidence configu-ration serves as the optimal topological prerequi-site, yielding a powerful peak performance (e.g., 43.15% R@5 vs. 16.26% for None). Interestingly, the category-wise comparison be-tween Additive and GRAIL (Table 14) reveals a clear performance trade-off. As previously ob-served in the MultimodalQA dataset experiments, 

Table 11: Statistics of the WebQA question type.                                     

> Question Type Train Val Test Total
> text 32,827 4,153 4,169 41,149 number 264 60 36 360 YesNo 6,848 790 844 8,482 choose 4,590 608 516 5,714 color 834 70 108 1,012 shape 136 614 156 Others 2,514 316 322 3,152
> Total Inst. 48,013 6,003 6,009 60,025

Table 12: Distribution of gating coefficients and mix-ing weights on WebQA. Values are reported as mean (standard deviation). Similar to MultimodalQA, w1 con-sistently converges to 1.000 across all query types with near-zero variance, isolating the subtractive gap.              

> Category Gate gWeight w1Weight w2
> text 0.186 (0 .070) 1 .000 (0 .001) 0 .000 (0 .001)
> number 0.081 (0 .085) 1 .000 (0 .000) 0 .000 (0 .000)
> YesNo 0.075 (0 .078) 1 .000 (0 .002) 0 .000 (0 .002)
> choose 0.139 (0 .107) 1 .000 (0 .001) 0 .000 (0 .001)
> color 0.092 (0 .097) 1 .000 (0 .000) 0 .000 (0 .000)
> shape 0.096 (0 .088) 1 .000 (0 .000) 0 .000 (0 .000)
> Others 0.065 (0 .067) 1 .000 (0 .005) 0 .000 (0 .005)

the Additive model shows strength when retrieving evidence within the same, single modality. Because individual queries in WebQA focus on finding mul-tiple assets from the exact same modality (either only text snippets or only images), this dataset is also likely to favor the Additive baseline. This al-lows Additive to perform better in minor attribute tasks such as Number , YesNo , and Shape .However, GRAIL shows a massive reversal when given enough training data to learn this non-cross-modal environment. In data-rich categories like Text and Others (see Table 11), where the model has sufficient examples to optimize its vec-tor steering layers, GRAIL heavily outperforms the baseline—boosting the Text category by a massive 

26.0%pp in R@1. Conversely, in minor categories like Number and Shape , the severe data scarcity makes it difficult for GRAIL to train its dynamic gating parameters, leaving them reliant on Addi-tive’s simple token accumulation. Importantly, even when raw recall fluctuates due to sample scarcity, a closer inspection of the set completion metric ( ∆esc ) reveals that the Additive 

framework suffers from systemic collapse, yielding negative margins (ranging from −0.134 to −0.229 )across every single category. In contrast, GRAIL consistently maintains positive ∆esc values without exception, proving its robust precision. This empirical complementarity confirms that 16 Table 13: Retrieval performance of gap-aware mecha-nism across different alignment strategies in WebQA. 

R@K metrics are reported in percentages (%). Full em-pirical comparison across all cross-modal topologies under both frozen and fine-tuned training regimes. ( FT :full fine-tuning, Frz : frozen backbones). Mapping in-dividual assets directly to the query via frozen Query-evidence serves as the optimal topological setting.                                                      

> Alignment R@1 R@5 R@20 R@50 ∆esc
> None Frz 0.00 16.26 33.72 43.96 −0.157
> FT 0.00 16.67 33.83 44.28 −0.162
> Centroid Frz 0.00 15.14 31.65 42.13 −0.276
> FT 0.00 15.09 31.62 41.65 −0.265
> CLS Frz 0.02 5.21 12.11 18.29 −0.178
> FT 0.03 5.48 11.76 17.31 −0.333
> Query-evidence Frz 25.60 43.15 57.14 64.77 +0.036
> FT 0.00 17.29 35.82 47.26 −0.465
> Query-set Frz 11.21 37.66 56.27 65.45 −0.127 FT 0.00 17.66 35.22 46.94 −0.454

Table 14: Retrieval performance across question types in WebQA. Comparison between the Additive baseline and GRAIL subject to q_type.                                                                           

> Type Method R@1 R@5 R@10 R@20 ∆esc
> Text Additive 11.97 49.87 63.64 74.14 −0.228
> GRAIL 37.95 60.68 69.30 75.85 +0.043
> Number Additive 16.67 30.00 38.33 40.00 −0.141
> GRAIL 5.00 11.67 16.67 16.67 +0.014
> YesNo Additive 3.42 12.78 18.10 25.57 −0.205
> GRAIL 2.41 6.71 10.51 16.58 +0.014
> Choose Additive 1.64 4.77 7.57 10.86 −0.229
> GRAIL 1.64 5.10 8.06 12.83 +0.032
> Color Additive 0.00 10.00 21.43 24.29 −0.210
> GRAIL 1.43 8.57 8.57 17.14 +0.020
> Shape Additive 16.67 66.67 66.67 83.33 −0.134
> GRAIL 0.00 16.67 33.33 66.67 +0.020
> Others Additive 4.43 12.97 18.67 23.73 −0.203
> GRAIL 2.85 8.54 12.03 18.67 +0.012

no single vector operator universally dominates all retrieval tasks, directly justifying our Hybrid framework guided by a lightweight question type selector (99.47% accuracy, 0.99 F1-score). As il-lustrated in Figure 9, this hybrid architecture dy-namically dispatches data-rich reasoning queries to GRAIL while routing localized attribute tasks to the Additive specialist, capturing a unified “best-of-both-worlds” performance. Finally, Sequential Pool Construction trials in WebQA (Table 15) demonstrate GRAIL’s superior noise-resilience and structural robustness over it-erative steps. Admittedly, GRAIL here does not universally achieve positive gains across all parti-tion schemes, showing slight performance drops in coarse schedules such as 5+5 (−0.22 pp) and 3+7 

(−0.53 pp). This phenomenon is intertwined with WebQA’s 

Figure 9: Hybrid framework leveraging complemen-tary specialists in WebQA. By dynamically routing each query to the optimal specialist, our Hybrid frame-work achieves a "best-of-both-worlds" performance. (+195.7% micro avg. gain over Additive) Table 15: Granular efficiency under various step con-figurations ( K = 10 ) in WebQA. Relative improve-ments are measured related to Query Only baseline. GRAIL maintains robust, positive margins across granu-lar partition schedules, whereas the Additive framework suffers severe performance degradation.                                     

> Steps Set-Rec@10 Jump NRM
> Query Only
> 10 51.06% ––
> Additive
> 5+5 −1.50 pp 25.3 −2.06 pp
> 3+7 −2.53 pp 31.9 −3.61 pp
> GRAIL (Ours)
> 8+1+1 +0.25pp 15.4 +0.59pp
> 8+2 +0.23pp 16.4 +0.69pp
> 5+5 −0.22 pp 16.1 −0.20 pp
> 3+7 −0.53 pp 15.5 +0.00pp
> 4+3+3 +0.27pp 16.4 +0.46pp
> 3+2+3+2 +0.10pp 16.2 +0.45pp
> 2*5 −0.02 pp 16.7 −0.13 pp
> 1*10 +0.05pp 17.0 −0.11 pp

evidence distribution, where most queries need roughly two gold assets, and the strong Query Only 

baseline typically captures at least one gold item in the top-K retrieval pool. However, GRAIL ex-hibits significantly higher mitigation against this noise-heavy environment compared to the Addi-tive framework, which completely collapses as it continuously absorbs the corrupted contexts. By explicitly canceling out the first captured gold item, GRAIL successfully shields the search vector from catastrophic drift, enabling positive recovery when steps are executed with higher granularity (e.g., reaching +0.27pp Set-Recall and +0.46pp NRM in 4+3+3 ). 

G Inference Cost Comparison 

Based on the efficiency profiles in Table 16, we evaluate the computational and financial viability 17 Table 16: Inference efficiency and operational cost comparison. All configurations utilize precomputed asset embeddings, requiring zero evidence encoder passes during inference. GRAIL completely eliminates the autoregres-sive LLM inference loop required by explicit query generation baselines, achieving millisecond-level latency and zero API cost while maintaining robustness to retrieval noise.                                                                         

> Model/ Cost Dimension Query Only Additive GRAIL (ours) No-Ctx IRCoT Ans-Aug
> LLM API Calls (per Q) 000111Question Encoder Passes 111111Active Parameter Scale ∼335M ∼335M ∼335M+1.3M —∼335M + LLM (7B–100B) — Trainable Parameters 3.68M 3.68M 5.00M (3.68M + 1.32M) — 3.68M (Shared Alignment Base) ‡—Avg. Input Tokens 000≈100 ≈776 ≈776 Avg. Output Tokens 000≈15 35.6 42.6 Avg. Latency (per Q) 2–5 ms 2–5 ms 3–6 ms 0.6–1.0 s 1.1–1.6 s 1.2–1.8 s Relative Throughput ∼400 ×∼400 ×∼350 ×1.8 ×1.0 ×(Base) 0.9 ×
> API Cost (per 1K Qs) †$0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.024 / $0.40 $0.138 / $2.30 $0.142 / $2.37 Vulnerability to Noise N/A High Low N/A Moderate Moderate
> †Costs are formatted as GPT-4o-mini /GPT-4o tiers. ‡LLM-based models utilize the frozen 3.68M parameters from our optimized alignment phase to perform the initial dense asset retrieval.

of GRAIL against explicit query regeneration via LLMs. 

Latency and Throughput Disparity Explicit LLM query regeneration introduces severe infer-ence bottlenecks due to its autoregressive genera-tion. As reported in Table 16, IRCoT and Answer-Augmented Retrieval require an average of 1.1–1.6 and 1.2–1.8 seconds per question, heavily burdened by processing ≈776 input tokens and generating up to 42.6 output tokens per step. In contrast, GRAIL completely bypasses the LLM inference loop dur-ing retrieval. By executing context-subtractive query steering via a lightweight gating mechanism, our framework achieves a near-instantaneous la-tency of just 3–6 ms per question. This translates to a ∼350 × throughput advantage , enabling real-time, large-scale multimodal retrieval. 

Financial and API Cost Analysis The opera-tional expenses further highlight the scalability of GRAIL. LLM-based query regeneration incurs sub-stantial commercial API costs that scale linearly with token volume. For instance, evaluating 1K questions under IRCoT costs up to $2.30 via pre-mium tiers like GPT-4o , and remains a noticeable overhead ($0.138) even with lightweight alterna-tives like GPT-4o-mini . Conversely, GRAIL oper-ates at a strict $0.00 API cost by relying solely on local bi-encoder operations over precomputed em-beddings. By replacing explicit text-based query generation with vector subtraction, our method eliminates financial dependencies on external com-mercial APIs, providing a fully self-contained de-ployment framework. 18