Title: A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.09084v1

Published Time: Mon, 13 Jul 2026 01:04:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
Chinese Journal of Electronics vol.35, no.5, pp.1– 24, 2026 https://doi.org/10.23919/cje.2025.00.438 

# Review 

# A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design 

## Linhui Xiao 1 , Guiping Cao 1 , Mingyue Guo 1 , Xianchao Guan 1,2 , Fan Yang 1 , Ming Tao 1 ,Xin Li 1,* , Yuxin Peng 3 , Yaowei Wang 2,1,* 

1. Pengcheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China 

2. Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen 518055, China 

3. Peking University, Beijing 100080, China 

Corresponding author: Xin Li, Yaowei Wang; Email: xinlihitsz@gmail.com, wangyw@pcl.ac.cn. Manuscript Received September 30, 2025; Accepted January 13, 2026; Published Online February 7, 2026. 

Abstract — The rapid expansion of large-scale AI models has led to significant performance breakthroughs across diverse domains, yet it has also raised critical concerns regarding computational costs, energy consumption, and environmental sustainability. This survey provides a comprehensive overview of the green development of large models, emphasizing resource-efficient architectures and full-stack hardware-software co-design. We sys-tematically review recent advances in efficient model construction, including attention operator optimization, linear-complexity architectures, and model sparsification and merging, as well as training and deployment strategies such as data-efficient learning, parameter-efficient fine-tuning, and computa-tional compression. Beyond algorithmic improvements, we explore energy-efficient AI hardware, including mainstream AI chips, memory optimization, cross-platform deployment, and sustainable infrastructure. Furthermore, we examine how large models are being applied to sustainability-critical domains such as DeepSeek, remote sensing interpretation, national-scale infrastructure, and global initiatives. Finally, we discuss key challenges and future directions, highlighting the need for continual learning paradigms, memory-centric hardware, and standardized evaluation protocols. This survey aims to offer a holistic roadmap toward sustainable, scalable, and socially responsible development of large models. 

Keywords — Green AI, Model Efficiency, Hardware-Software Co-Design, Sustainable Computing, Large Models 

I. Introduction 

In recent years, large-scale Artificial Intelligence (AI) mod-els, especially those built upon Transformer architectures [1], have achieved significant breakthroughs in natural language processing, computer vision, and scientific computing. Flag-ship models such as BERT [2], CLIP [3], LLaVA [4], and the GPT series [5] have continuously expanded the frontier of AI. However, this progress has come with substantial costs: the exponential increase in model parameters, training data, and input length has led to skyrocketing computational demands, resulting in massive energy consumption and environmental concerns, as shown in Table 1. As model parameters scale from billions to trillions and input sequences extend from 1K to 100K tokens, training and inference costs have increased superlinearly, posing major challenges to the accessibility ,

scalability , and sustainability of large-scale AI systems. *

> ∗

https://cje.ejournal.org.cn/article/doi/10.23919/cje.2025.00.438 题目： 

Efficient 

Model 

Construction 

From Resource-Efficient Architectures to 

Hardware-Software Co-Design 

Reduce the 

burden of 

computing and 

memory Optimize 

model 

design 

Optimize the training and 

deployment strategy 

Highly compatible with the 

hardware characteristics 

Directly affects 

the design of 

the model 

structure 

New 

frameworks 

drives the 

iteration of chip 

architectures 

Efficient 

Training and 

Optimized 

Computation 

Green 

AI Chips and 

Hardware-

Software Co-

Design 

返修版本 

(Sec. Ⅱ) 

(Sec. Ⅳ) (Sec. Ⅲ) 

Figure 1 A triangular framework illustrating the layered relationship among model architecture, training strategies, and green AI hardware. 

The core of this inefficiency lies in the architectural de-arXiv:2607.09084v1 [cs.LG] 10 Jul 2026 A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design 2                                                

> Table 1 Comparison of GPU hours, Energy Usage, and Carbon Footprint for training mainstream large models. †indicates no official data available, and the values are estimated and for reference only.
> Model GPU hours (h) Eneregy Usage (KWh) Carbon Emitted (tCO 2eq) CLIP 256k V100 71k 24 †
> BLOOM 1,083k A100 475k 183 GPT-3 3,140k ∼4,600k †V100 1,287k †552 †
> GPT-4o ∼60,000k †H100 16,800k †21,660 †
> Gemini 1 40,000k ∼50,000k †TPUv4 8,000k ∼12,000k †4,000 ∼6,000 †
> Gemini 2 12,000k ∼15,000k †TPUv6 3,000k ∼5,000k †1,500 ∼2,500 †
> Qwen3-Max ∼300,000k †H200 23,000k †-DeepSeek-V3 2,788k H800 1,087k †584 LLAMA 1,022k A100 449k 173 LLAMA 2 1,720k A100 688k †291 LLAMA 3 30,840k H100 >11,000k 11,390 SAM 18k A100 7k 3SAM 3 172k A100 or 86k H200 142k ∼176k 66 ∼78

sign of dominant models. The attention mechanism [1] in Transformers scales with O(N 2) time and memory complex-ity, creating the well-known “ quadratic wall ” that severely limits the processing of long contexts. Moreover, the dense activation paradigm requires every parameter in the model to participate in each computation, irrespective of its relevance, resulting in substantial waste of computational resources and memory. These foundational limitations have made the train-ing of leading-edge models extremely resource-intensive: for instance, training a 100K-context model can incur nearly 100 × the cost of training a 10K-context model. The environ-mental impact is equally concerning, with recent studies es-timating that training a single large model can emit as much carbon as the lifetime emissions of multiple cars [6]. Numerous surveys have emerged in response to these challenges [7–10]. However, most of them [7–9] concen-trate on isolated technical components, such as Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT), quantization, or pruning, with-out providing a system-level perspective. In particular, they often neglect the role of hardware constraints and co-design strategies, and typically lack coverage of emerging tech-niques like physics-inspired models, state-space modeling, or model merging. Furthermore, prior works rarely explore real-world sustainability applications, such as remote sensing or climate modeling, where efficient AI can make a tangible en-vironmental impact. To address these challenges systematically, this survey adopts a top-down perspective that reflects both the logical hierarchy and structural dependencies of efficient AI sys-tems. As illustrated in Figure 1, we organize the green de-velopment of large models into a triangular framework 

spanning three tightly coupled layers: (1) the top layer fo-cuses on resource-efficient architectures, where innovations in model design shape computational patterns and compati-bility with downstream hardware; (2) the middle layer em-phasizes training and deployment optimization, bridging al-gorithmic techniques with system constraints; and (3) the bottom layer centers on hardware–software co-design, where energy-efficient chips, inference memory optimization, and collaborative cross-platform deployment support upper-layer models. This structure is not merely hierarchical, but also bidirectional: architectural breakthroughs influence chip de-sign, while hardware capabilities inform model structure and optimization strategy. Unlike prior literature, we present a unified view of how efficiency gains emerge from layer-wise collaboration rather than isolated techniques. As shown in Figure 2, following this framework, Sec. 2 

surveys architectural-level innovations, including physics-inspired models like vHeat [11], state-space models such as VMamba [12], sparsity techniques like Mixture of Ex-perts (MoE), and model merging. Sec. 3 focuses on train-ing and optimized computation, covering data-efficient learn-ing strategies, distributed training, parameter-efficient fine-tuning, model and computational compression, such as quan-tization, distillation, and speculative decoding. Sec. 4 exam-ines the green AI hardware, highlighting memory optimiza-tion, cross-platform deployment, and energy-aware hardware system design. Sec. 5 extends the discussion to AI for sustain-ability, covering recent Chinese advances like DeepSeek and the “Aerospace·Lingmou” 3.0 system, national-scale infras-tructure such as C 2NET, and global initiatives led by Google, Meta, and others. Finally, Sec. 6 discusses future opportuni-ties, including continual learning, neuromorphic computing, edge AI, and the pressing need for standardized efficiency benchmarks. Collectively, these chapters provide a layered and interconnected perspective on the emerging landscape of green AI. By integrating model design, algorithm optimization, and hardware implementation into a unified framework, this sur-vey aims to provide both theoretical insights and practi-cal guidance for developing scalable, low-carbon AI sys-tems. We emphasize the interplay of sparsity, modularity, and hardware-awareness as recurring principles across layers, and advocate for a lifecycle-aware approach to AI sustainability, from pretraining to deployment and beyond. In summary, this survey contributes to the field by of-fering a unified, full-stack perspective that emphasizes the interdependence between model design, optimization strate-gies, and hardware implementation. We introduce a triangular framework that captures the bidirectional influences among layers and systematically organizes recent advances within it. Additionally, we highlight how design decisions at one layer affect constraints and opportunities at others. By synthesizing a broad range of techniques into a cohesive view, we aim to support researchers and practitioners in navigating the com-plex trade-offs involved in building efficient, scalable, and sustainable large-scale AI systems. 3 Chinese Journal of Electronics, vol.35, no.5, pp.1-24, https://doi.org/10.23919/cje.2025.00.438 

Survey on the Green Development of Large Models 

§1 Introduction Research Status and Our Pipeline 

§2 Efficient Model Construction 

§2.1 Attention Operator Optimization 

§2.1.1 Quadratic Complexity Analysis CLIP [3]; GPT [5]; etc .

§2.1.2 Linear Attention Linear [13]; etc .

§2.1.3 Flash Attention FlashAttention [14–16]; etc .

§2.2 Efficient Model Design 

§2.2.1 Physics-Inspired Models vHeat [11]; etc .

§2.2.2 State Space Models VMamba [12]; etc .

§2.2.3 Other Linear-Complexity Models RWKV [17]; RetNet [18] 

§2.3 Model Sparsification and Merging 

§2.3.1 Sparse Activation Mechanism MoE [19–21] ; etc .

§2.3.2 Model Merging Survey [22]; etc .

§3 Efficient Training and Optimized Computation 

§3.1 Data-Efficient Techniques 

§3.1.1 Data-Efficient Sampling SAI-DPO [23]; etc .

§3.1.2 Data-Efficient Distillation KRR [24–26]; etc .

§3.1.3 Data-Efficient Pruning DeepCore[27]; etc .

§3.2 Distributed Training Techniques 

§3.2.1 Data and Model Parallelism [28–30]; [31–33]; etc .

§3.2.2 Mix-Precision Training BLOOM [34]; etc .

§3.3 Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning 

§3.3.1 Prompt-based Tuning prompt ensembling [35]; etc .

§3.3.2 Adapter Tuning Adapter [36]; etc .

§3.3.3 Low-Rank Adaption vanilla LoRA [37]; etc .

§3.4 Model and Computational Compression 

§3.4.1 Low-Precision Quantization LLM-QAT [38]; etc .

§3.4.2 Model Pruning SparseGPT [39]; etc .

§3.4.3 Knowledge Distillation TinyLLM [40]; etc .

§3.4.4 Speculative Decoding SpecEE [41]; etc .

§4 Green Computing AI Chips and Hardware-Software Co-Design 

§4.1 Mainstream AI Chips and Application Ecology 

§4.1.1 Classification of AI Chips Survey [42]; etc .

§4.1.2 Global AI Chip Ecosystems TPU [43]; etc .

§4.1.3 Domestic AI Chip Development Cambricon [44]; etc .

§4.2 Inference Memory Optimization 

§4.2.1 KV Cache Optimization LaCache [45]; etc .

§4.2.2 Memory Offloading Aqua [46]; HeadInfer [47] 

§4.2.3 Early Exiting AdaInfer [48]; etc .

§4.3 Hardware-Software Collaborative Cross-platform Deployment 

§4.3.1 Unified Inference Framework LLMBox [49]; etc .

§4.3.2 Automatic Operator Scheduling LightLLM [50]; etc .

§4.3.3 Key Operator Discretization Qtile [51]; KPerfIR [52]; etc .

§4.4 Energy-Efficient Hardware System 

§4.4.1 Emerging Green Chip Technologies neuromorphic chip [53]; etc .

§4.4.2 Decentralized Green Learning PETALS [54]; etc .

§4.4.3 Green Data Centers [6, 55, 56]; etc .

§5 AI for Sustainability Application 

§5.1 Parallel Training and RL-Driven Reasoning Paradigm 

§5.2 Remote Sensing Interpretation: RS-vHeat and “Aerospace·Lingmou” 3.0 

§5.3 China Computing NET (C 2NET): A National-Scale Sustainable Infrastructure 

§5.4 Google and Meta: Full-Stack Optimization for Sustainable AI 

§5.5 Global AI Applications for Multi-Domain Sustainability 

§6 Discussion and Future Outlook 

§6.1 Learning without Starting Over: Continual; Incremental; and Federated Training 

§6.2 Co-Designing Models with Memory and Physics-Centric Compute 

§6.3 Edge AI: Efficiency on Constrained Devices 

§6.4 Standardized and Unified Evaluation 

§7 Conclusion Summary of the Full Text 

Figure 2 Overview of the paper structure, detailing Chapter 1-7. A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design 4

II. Efficient Model Construction 

The rapid progress in large-scale neural networks has driven remarkable advances in AI, but at the expense of sharply in-creasing computational and memory costs. As models and context lengths grow, the conventional Transformer architec-ture encounters fundamental scalability issues, particularly due to the quadratic complexity of its attention mechanism, which becomes a major bottleneck in long-sequence scenar-ios. This section provides a review of cutting-edge innova-tions at the architectural level that are designed to mitigate the computational and memory demands of large models. We fo-cus on three major research directions: (1) attention operator optimization ; (2) efficient model design ; (3) model sparsifica-tion and merging . Each of these approaches seeks to decou-ple model performance from resource consumption, opening pathways to sustainable and scalable AI development. 

1. Attention Operator Optimization 

Computational operators are the core kernels executing tensor operations, a function crucial for enhancing computational efficiency. A representative case is the attention mechanism in Transformers, whose quadratic complexity with respect to sequence length introduces fundamental bottlenecks in mem-ory and speed. To overcome these limitations, research has pivoted to hardware-aware and efficiency-driven operator de-signs. The following section highlights several representative operator designs. 

1) Quadratic Complexity in Attention Mechanism 

Traditional attention mechanisms achieve global dependency modeling by computing correlations between every position in a sequence through the scaled dot-product attention for-mula: Attention( Q, K, V ) = softmax 

 QK T

> √dk



V , where 

Q (queries), K (keys), and V (values) are linear projec-tions of the input sequence. This process involves calculat-ing QK T to generate an N × N similarity matrix, scaling it, applying softmax for normalization, and finally weight-ing V vectors. Multi-head self-/cross-attention extends this by running multiple attention functions in parallel to capture diverse representations. However, the core limitation arises from the QK T computation, which exhibits quadratic com-plexity O  N 2 in both computation and memory require-ments. For example, when sequence length increases from 1K to 32K tokens, the attention matrix storage demand grows by a factor of 1,024, creating a severe “ quadratic wall ” that hin-ders long-sequence processing. Despite the success of mod-els like BERT [2], CLIP [3], and GPT [57] in NLP and vi-sion tasks, this complexity poses significant challenges for practical deployment in scenarios requiring long-context un-derstanding, such as long document analysis, high-resolution image processing, and extended video sequences. 

2) Linear Attention 

Following the quadratic complexity challenges of traditional Transformers, Linear Attention [13] reduces computational complexity from O  N 2 to linear O(N ) through feature mapping functions ϕ(Q) and ϕ(K) that transform Query and Key matrices into higher-dimensional feature represen-tations. The key insight reformulates attention computation by applying feature mappings such as ϕ(x) = ReLU( x) or 

ϕ(x) = ELU( x) + 1 to queries and keys, then leveraging matrix multiplication associativity to reorganize computation order and avoid explicit attention matrix construction. Instead of computing the full QK T attention matrix, Linear Atten-tion precomputes the combinations of mapped keys with val-ues and reuses them for every query, achieving linear com-plexity. While this approach theoretically enables processing of arbitrarily long sequences, Linear Attention suffers from significant performance degradation, particularly in tasks re-quiring precise positional information and local dependency modeling, as the linearization process loses the sharp, focused distributions that traditional Softmax attention provides. Rep-resentative works include Linformer [58] and Linear Trans-former [59], primarily applied to long document understand-ing and time series prediction, but practical deployment re-mains limited due to substantial accuracy losses that often cannot be justified by efficiency gains in core NLP tasks. 

3) Flash Attention 

Flash Attention [14] addresses the memory bottleneck of standard attention mechanisms through tiled computation and memory access optimization, maintaining O  N 2 compu-tational complexity while achieving significant memory ef-ficiency improvements. Unlike Linear Attention’s complex-ity reduction approach, Flash Attention reorganizes compu-tation patterns by decomposing attention into blocks that fit within GPU’s SRAM, using online softmax algorithms to avoid materializing complete attention matrices and reducing memory complexity from O  N 2 to O(N ). The technique minimizes expensive memory transfers between HBM (High Bandwidth Memory) and SRAM, achieving 2-4 × speedups for sequences up to 8K tokens, though computational costs for ultra-long sequences ( >100 K tokens) remain prohibitive due to the unchanged algorithmic complexity. The Flash At-tention family has evolved through v1/v2/v3 iterations [14– 16], with v2 adding variable sequence length support and v3 enhancing hardware utilization, becoming ubiquitous in production systems including GPT-4 [5], Claude [60], and LLaMA [61]. This memory optimization approach is com-plementary to Linear Attention’s complexity reduction, sug-gesting potential for hybrid methods that combine both algo-rithmic efficiency and implementation optimizations for next-generation attention mechanisms. These operator-level optimizations enable longer se-quences and lower latency while bridging the gap between theoretical algorithm efficiency and real-world performance. Together, they form the foundation of modern deep learn-ing engines, allowing full-stack computation redesign with-out changing model semantics. Such innovations are essential 5 Chinese Journal of Electronics, vol.35, no.5, pp.1-24, https://doi.org/10.23919/cje.2025.00.438 

for efficient training and deployment of next-generation large models, making AI computing more efficient and accessible. 

2. Efficient Model Design 

To advance the computational efficiency of large-scale mod-els, it is essential to not only optimize computational opera-tors for enhancing microscopic tensor computations but also adopt a holistic approach toward efficient model construction that improves end-to-end model efficiency. The following sections explore a range of efficient models and the innovative techniques behind them, highlighting their collective contribution to improved efficiency. 

1) Physics-Inspired Models 

The vHeat [11] model represents innovative exploration in physics-inspired modeling, achieving complexity reduction from O  N 2 to O  N 1.5 by analogizing visual informa-tion propagation to heat conduction phenomena. As illus-trated in Figure 4, the model’s core innovation introduces the Heat Conduction Operator (HCO), designed based on gen-eral solutions of 2D heat conduction equations, simulating heat diffusion processes in the frequency domain through ef-ficient Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) and Inverse DCT (IDCT). Adaptive heat diffusion coefficients are dynamically predicted through learnable Frequency Value Embeddings (FVEs), achieving global receptive fields while maintaining sub-quadratic complexity. vHeat’s primary limitation lies in the approximation nature of physical simulation, which may not fully capture complex semantic dependencies. The model demonstrates excellent performance in image classification and object detection tasks, with particularly notable advan-tages in remote sensing image processing [62]. This estab-lishes a critical theoretical and technical foundation for the future development of linear complexity models. 

2) State Space Models 

State Space Models (SSMs) have emerged as a powerful al-ternative to traditional attention-based architectures, achiev-ing breakthroughs in efficient long-sequence modeling. By introducing state variables to encode historical context, SSMs transform sequence modeling from quadratic attention com-putation to linear-time state transitions, reducing time and space complexity from O  N 2 to O (N ). The foundational principle of SSMs lies in their formulation as discrete-time dynamical systems, mathematically governed by state transi-tion matrix A, input matrix B, and output matrix C. This for-mulation allows the model to capture long-range dependen-cies through continuous state evolution, avoiding the need for pairwise token interactions. Representative models include S4 [63], Mamba [64], and its vision variant VMamba [12]. S4 [63] introduced a hardware-aware efficient algorithm and demonstrated strong performance in long-range reasoning tasks. Mamba [64] further advanced SSMs by proposing the Selective Scan Mechanism (SSM), which enables state transi-tion parameters to dynamically adapt based on input content. This overcomes a key limitation of earlier SSMs, which strug-gled with content-aware reasoning. VMamba [12] extended these principles to computer vision, introducing a cross-scale scanning strategy to maintain global receptive fields in visual tasks. The architecture achieved a 2.8× speedup and reduced GPU memory usage by 86 .8% in high-resolution image pro-cessing, showcasing the versatility of state-space methods be-yond language. These successes highlight the role of SSMs in enabling scalable and efficient inference in data-intensive domains, offering a promising path toward sustainable and high-performance AI systems. 

3) Other Linear-Complexity Models 

Beyond the mainstream SSMs development trajectory, the academic community has explored numerous innovative ap-proaches to linear complexity architectures, each addressing specific aspects of the quadratic bottleneck through distinct technical pathways. 

RWKV (Receptance Weighted Key Value) [17] achieves linear complexity language modeling through ingenious fu-sion of RNN’s recurrent mechanisms with Transformer’s par-allel training advantages. Its core innovation reformulates the attention mechanism into recursive form, maintaining global information access capabilities while achieving linear com-plexity and elegantly bridging the gap between sequential processing efficiency and parallel training scalability. 

RetNet (Retentive Network) [18] proposes the Retention Mechanism, which incorporates relative positional encoding to support parallelization during training while enabling re-current computation during inference. This design achieves dual optimization of both training and inference efficiency, addressing the fundamental trade-off between training paral-lelizability and inference efficiency that has long challenged sequence modeling architectures. As illustrated in Figure 3, these architectural innova-tions demonstrate varying levels of complexity reduction, with conventional Self-Attention constrained by O  N 2

self-attention complexity, while novel approaches like vHeat achieve O  N 1.5 complexity through heat conduction oper-ators, and architectures such as VMamba reach linear O (N )

complexity via cross-scan mechanisms. These diverse explo-rations collectively demonstrate the rich technical ecosystem emerging around linear complexity architectures, providing multiple potential pathways for future development and driv-ing efficient sequence modeling technology toward more ma-ture and practical applications. 

3. Model Sparsification and Merging 

Building on advances in attention operators and efficient ar-chitectures, we now examine complementary approaches fo-cused on optimizing and consolidating existing models rather than designing new ones from scratch. These strategies re-duce the footprint of large models while preserving capa-bilities, directly addressing computational and memory con-straints. The following sections will delve into the technical A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design 6(a) Transformers: 𝑂 (𝑁 2) (b) vHeat : 𝑂 (𝑁 1.5) (c) VMamba : 𝑂 (𝑁 )

Attention 

Input token 

Output token  Attention                

> 𝑂 (𝑁 2)complexity
> Cross -Scan
> 𝑂 𝑁 complexity
> ℱ−1ℱ𝑥 𝑒 −𝑘 𝜔 𝑥
> 2+𝜔 𝑦
> 2𝑡 ~𝑶 (𝑵 𝟏 .𝟓 )
> 𝑠𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑄 𝐾 𝑇 /𝑑 𝑘 𝑉 ~𝑶 (𝑵 𝟐 )
> Self -Attention
> Heat Conduction
> Operator

Figure 3 Computational complexity comparison of fundamental architectures: (a) Transformers [1] with O(N 2) self-attention, (b) vHeat [11] with 

O(N 1.5) heat conduction operator, and (c) VMamba [12] with O(N ) cross-scan mechanism. (c) Architecture of vHeat                              

> H
> 32 ×W
> 32 ×C4
> H×W×3
> Stem  HCO
> Layer
> Stage 1
> ×L1
> Down Sample
> HCO
> Layer
> Stage 2
> H
> 8×W
> 8×C2
> ×L2
> Down Sample
> HCO
> Layer
> Stage 3
> ×L3
> H
> 16 ×W
> 16 ×C3
> Down Sample
> HCO
> Layer
> Stage 4
> ×L4
> H
> 4×W
> 4×C1
> Input Image
> H
> 4×W
> 4×C1

(a) Heat Conduction Operator 

> DCT 2D
> IDCT 2D
> 𝑘
> Linear
> FVEs
> 𝑒 −𝑘 𝜔 2𝑡

(b) HCO Layer  

> LN
> HCO Block Linear
> DWConv
> Linear
> HCO
> LN
> LN
> FFN
> Linear
> SiLU

Figure 4 Illustration of vHeat’s [11] framework. It shows the heat conduction-inspired mechanism and the integration of the Discrete Cosine Transform for efficient global dependency modeling. …

Router 

Input Hidden 𝐮𝐮 𝑡𝑡 

Output Hidden 𝐡𝐡 𝑡𝑡 ′     

> 1𝑁𝑁 𝑠𝑠 12𝑁𝑁 𝑟𝑟 -1 𝑁𝑁 𝑟𝑟

Shared Expert 

Routed Expert 

Top-𝐾𝐾 𝑟𝑟 

work   

> …34

DeepSeekMoE 

0

Input Hidden 𝐡𝐡 𝑡𝑡 

Multi-Head Latent Attention (MLA) 

0

{𝐪𝐪 𝑡𝑡 ,𝑖𝑖 𝐶𝐶 } {𝐯𝐯 𝑡𝑡 ,𝑖𝑖 𝐶𝐶 }{𝐤𝐤 𝑡𝑡 ,𝑖𝑖 𝐶𝐶 }

Latent 𝐜𝐜 𝑡𝑡 𝐾𝐾𝐾𝐾 

Latent 𝐜𝐜 𝑡𝑡 𝑄𝑄 

{𝐪𝐪 𝑡𝑡 ,𝑖𝑖 𝑅𝑅 } 𝐤𝐤 𝑡𝑡 𝑅𝑅 

Cached During Inference 

Multi-Head Attention  

> concatenate concatenate

{[ 𝐪𝐪 𝑡𝑡 ,𝑖𝑖 𝐶𝐶 ; 𝐪𝐪 𝑡𝑡 ,𝑖𝑖 𝑅𝑅 ]}  {[ 𝐤𝐤 𝑡𝑡 ,𝑖𝑖 𝐶𝐶 ; 𝐤𝐤 𝑡𝑡 𝑅𝑅 ]} 

> …

Output Hidden 𝐮𝐮 𝑡𝑡   

> …
> ……
> ……

1… … 

> ……
> apply
> RoPE
> apply
> RoPE

Figure 5 Illustration of the Mixture of Experts (MoE) architecture [65]. MoE employs a gating network to dynamically route input to-kens to a subset of specialized expert networks, enabling efficient sparse activation and improved scalability for large-scale models. 

intricacies and recent advancements within these domains. 

1) Sparse Activation Mechanism 

The core idea of sparse activation is to break through these computational bottlenecks through clever design: each in-put token activates only a small subset of parameters in the network, dramatically reducing actual computational require-ments while maintaining or even improving model perfor-mance. The Mixture of Experts (MoE) architecture [19–21] represents the most successful implementation of this prin-ciple, as shown in Figure 5, replacing traditional dense FFN layers with multiple specialized expert sub-networks and em-ploying learnable gating mechanisms to determine which ex-perts process each token. The mathematical foundation of MoE can be expressed precisely: An MoE layer contains N expert networks 

[E1, E 2, . . . , E N ], where a gating network generates logits normalized through softmax distribution. The gating value for expert i is: 

G(x) = softmax ( g1(x), g 2(x), . . . , g N (x)) (1) Top-k gating selects the experts with highest probabilities, defining active expert set τ , and the MoE output becomes: 

MoE( x) = X

i∈τ

G(x)i · Ei(x) (2) This design decomposes complex problems into specialized subtasks, with each expert handling specific input patterns, achieving dual improvements in computational efficiency and model capability while dramatically reducing computation through selective expert activation. As shown in Table 2, the evolution of MoE technol-ogy has led to diverse architectural paradigms, each ad-dressing specific computational challenges and application requirements. Based on fundamental differences in rout-ing strategies, activation patterns, and specialization mech-anisms, MoE architectures can be categorized into seven dis-tinct paradigms that represent the technical spectrum from early fixed assignment approaches to modern adaptive sys-tems. Each paradigm offers unique advantages for different deployment scenarios and performance objectives. Model 1 Model 2 Model T…

> Final Model

Merge          

> …
> Model 1 Model 2 Model T…
> Data 1 Data 2 Data T
> Task 1 Task 2 Task T…

(a) Separate Models (b) Model Merging    

> Task 1 Task 2 Task T…

Figure 6 Illustration of the model merging paradigm [22]. (a) T separate models for T tasks, (b) A merged model for T tasks. 

2) Model Merging 

This frontier investigates approaches to combine the knowl-edge and capabilities of multiple pre-trained models, each po-tentially specialized for different tasks, into a single, unified model without access to the original training data. Known as 7 Chinese Journal of Electronics, vol.35, no.5, pp.1-24, https://doi.org/10.23919/cje.2025.00.438                          

> Table 2 Systematic classification of MoE method paradigms. A comprehensive taxonomy of seven distinct MoE architectures spanning from early fixed assignment approaches to modern adaptive systems, highlighting their key characteristics, representative applications, and primary advantages across different deployment scenarios and performance objectives.
> Paradigm Key Characteristics Main Applications Advantages Static MoE Fixed expert-input mapping MoE [19] Early theoretical work Dynamic Sparse MoE Learnable gating, top-k activation GShard [21], Switch Transformer [20] Large language models Dense MoE All experts activated Soft MoE [66] High-accuracy scenarios Hierarchical MoE Multi-level expert organization Deep MoE [67], PLE [68] Complex structured problems Multi-task MoE Task-specific gating MMoE [69], PLE [68] Recommendation systems Multi-modal MoE Modality-specific experts V- MoE [70], MoE-LLaVA [4] Vision-language tasks Adaptive/Evolutionary MoE Dynamic expert adjustment AdaMoE [71], EvoMoE [72] Research frontiers

Model Merging [22], this process aims to construct a gen-eralist model by combining several specialists. As shown in Figure 6, it represents a form of zero-shot compression and knowledge integration, eliminating the need to store or de-ploy multiple separate models and thus reducing both mem-ory overhead and inference latency. The techniques can be broadly categorized into four key areas each contributing unique advancements: foundational methods like Task Arithmetic [73], which establishes basic principles through task vector operations to combine or re-move capabilities; efficient and scalable techniques such as Model Soups [74], which employs weight averaging to en-hance generalization without increasing inference costs; spe-cialized approaches including ZipIt [75], which tailors merg-ing for heterogeneous architectures through feature align-ment; and theoretical frameworks exemplified by Linear Mode Connectivity (LMC) [76, 77], which explains loss land-scape connectivity to justify weight interpolation. Based on the aforementioned approaches, such as specifi-cally model sparsification and merging, not only effectively tackle scalability challenges in large-scale AI systems but also advance sustainable AI development by encouraging resource-efficient model reuse and collaborative integration. Collectively, they form a robust post-design methodology that produces highly efficient, versatile, and scalable models, ulti-mately paving the way for more sustainable and adaptable AI ecosystems. These framework-level efforts enhance the over-all efficiency of AI deployments while minimizing computa-tional costs and environmental impact. 

III. Efficient Training and Optimized Computation 

The scaling of large-scale models to billions of parameters creates a severe computational bottleneck, making training and computation exceptionally costly, time-consuming, and environmentally unsustainable due to the substantial carbon footprint. To address these challenges, a number of tech-niques have been introduced across complementary fronts for developing efficient training, including data-efficient tech-niques , distributed training techniques , parameter-efficient fine-tuning , and model and computational compression . This section details these essential approaches and their impacts for achieving green AI development. 

1. Data-Efficient Techniques 

The reliance of large-scale models on massive datasets makes their training computationally intensive and environmentally costly. Data-efficient techniques mitigate this by maximiz-ing the utility of every data sample, reducing resource use without compromising performance. According to the mode of data operation, this review categorizes data-efficient tech-niques into three areas: sampling , distillation , and pruning .

1) Data-Efficient Sampling 

Non-uniform sampling reduces training data volume without compromising model performance by selectively emphasiz-ing the most informative examples. As a static data schedul-ing strategy used in LLM pre-training ( e.g ., GPT-3 [78], LLaMA [79]), it assigns manual sampling weights to upsam-ple high-quality data and downsample lower-quality content, thereby increasing exposure to valuable information while preserving diversity. In contrast to this static approach, Dynamic Data Sam-pling is a technique that dynamically adapts the sampling strategy throughout the training process based on data char-acteristics, model state, or task requirements. These methods are categorized according to their adaptation criteria. 

Difficulty-Based Sampling . It prioritizes samples by diffi-culty, often starting with easier examples to stabilize train-ing before introducing harder ones. Curriculum Learning (CL) [80–82] trains models on data ordered from easy to hard, mimicking human educational progression. Recent ex-tensions, such as SAI-DPO [23], dynamically select training data for mathematical reasoning using “self-aware difficulty” metrics across different training phases, thus enhancing both data utilization efficiency and final task performance. 

Loss-Based Sampling . This approach dynamically prioritizes training examples by their loss values or gradient norms to focus on informative or poorly learned samples. Core meth-ods include direct loss reweighting ( e.g ., up-weighting high-loss samples), and approximated loss sampling (using proxy models to predict loss and reduce computation). The loss value is introduced as an alternative metric in pioneering ap-proaches [83, 84] to construct a sampling distribution that re-duces gradient variance compared to uniform sampling. Im-portance Sampling [85] reduces variance by weighting sam-ples according to a tractable upper bound on the per-sample gradient norm. Recent dynamic loss-based method [86] em-A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design 8

ploys instance-level data reweighting to prioritize informative samples, emphasizing challenging data while reducing focus on redundant ones. 

2) Data-Efficient Distillation 

Dataset distillation [87] aims to produce a compressed, highly informative synthetic subset that preserves the core features and distribution of original dataset, thereby drastically reduc-ing its size. A comprehensive review [88] outlines a general framework for data distillation. The methods are grouped into three categories: performance matching , parameter match-ing , and distribution matching .

Performance Matching . This method optimizes synthetic data to ensure that models trained on it achieve performance comparable to those trained on original data, as measured by minimal loss on the original dataset. They can be fur-ther categorized into two types: (1) Meta learning-based ap-proaches [87, 89], which are computationally expensive and require substantial GPU memory; (2) Kernel Ridge Regres-sion (KRR)-based methods [24–26], which employ convex optimization and yield a closed-form solution for linear mod-els, avoiding the need for extensive inner-loop training. 

Parameter Matching . The core of this approach involves training an identical network architecture separately on both the synthetic and original datasets, while enforcing consis-tency between the model parameters derived from both data sources. Considering the number of training steps, this ap-proach can be further categorized into single-step parameter matching [90] and multi-step parameter matching [91, 92]. Single-step methods focus on computational efficiency by following instantaneous gradients, while multi-step methods aim for higher accuracy by converging to optimal parameter states via multi-step optimization. 

Distribution Matching . This approach aims to align the dis-tribution of synthetic data with that of real data. Distribu-tion matching differs from other methods by directly mini-mizing the distribution distance between synthetic and real data, employing metrics like Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [93]. CAFE [94] constrains the feature statistics of synthetic and real samples to be consistent across all network layers except the last one. To better capture distributional differences, NCFD [95] formulates dataset distillation as a min-max optimization problem using the Neural Character-istic Function Discrepancy, which is a novel and theoretical metric for distribution comparison. 

3) Data-Efficient Pruning 

Data pruning strives to remove redundant samples to retain the most informative subset of dataset, known as the coreset. Research on data pruning primarily follows two approaches: 

score-based and geometry-based methods. 

Score-Based . This method assigns importance metrics to data points and retain those with the highest scores. DeepCore [27] constructs a comprehensive code library and provide an em-pirical study on popular coreset selection methods. By cal-culating the average L2 norm of the error vector, E2LN [96] assesses the importance of training examples, identifying cru-cial examples very early in training. The field has further evolved to include a variety of strategies, such as those based on “forgetting events” to measure how often each example is forgotten during training [97], prioritizing uncertain sam-ples based on prediction variation (Dyn-Unc [98]), and hybrid strategies like TDDS’s dual-depth pruning [99] that combine difficulty and uncertainty. 

Geometry-Based . This approach aims to construct a coreset that better represents the underlying data distribution [100]. To construct representative coresets, various methods have been proposed: Herding [101] minimizes distribution dis-crepancy; SSP [102] and Moderate [103] reduce redundancy by selecting distant or median samples, though this may harm generalization by overlooking difficult examples. Addressing this, D2 pruning [104] uses a graph-based message-passing mechanism to enhance diversity and model generalization. In brief, data-efficient techniques are shifting from static, rule-based strategies toward adaptive and intelligently sched-uled systems. The trend is toward intelligent data orchestra-tors. Powered by meta- and reinforcement learning, these sys-tems manage data selection as a self-evolving data learning loop, dynamically curating the training stream for peak effi-ciency in large-scale model training. 

2. Distributed Training Techniques 

Distributed training leverages multiple workers to maximize computational resources, accelerate training, and improve model accuracy. It addresses the computational and mem-ory limitations of a single device but introduces three major challenges: (1) Single devices cannot meet the computational demands of modern large-scale training; (2) Model param-eters exceed the memory limits of a single device; (3) Dis-tributed training suffers from high communication costs due to frequent synchronization. These challenges are addressed through multiple parallelization and mixed-precision training 

strategies in distributed training. 

1) Data and Model Parallelism 

Data Parallelism . As a fundamental technique for improv-ing training throughput, data parallelism [28] replicates the model across all workers, with each processing a distinct subset of the dataset. To maintain weight consistency, work-ers periodically synchronize their gradients. ZeRO [29] (Zero Redundancy Optimizer), introduced by the Deep-Speed [30], significantly reduces memory usage by optimizer states par-titioning, gradients partitioning, and model parameters parti-tioning, eliminating redundant storage across devices. How-ever, its main limitation lies in the substantial communication overhead that arises with extremely large models. 

Model Parallelism . When a model exceeds the memory capacity of a single device, model parallelism becomes necessary. Two prominent strategies are Tensor Parallelism (TP) [31] and Pipeline Parallelism (PP) [32]. TP decomposes 9 Chinese Journal of Electronics, vol.35, no.5, pp.1-24, https://doi.org/10.23919/cje.2025.00.438 

weight matrices within specific layers ( e.g ., attention or feed-forward networks) across devices, enabling parallel computa-tion. However, each forward and backward pass necessitates full all-reduce operations to synchronize partial results, in-troducing notable communication overhead. In contrast, PP distributes entire layers across devices arranged in a sequen-tial pipeline, reducing per-device memory load at the expense of potential pipeline bubbles. While both approaches mitigate memory constraints by distributing parameters and computa-tion, they incur additional communication costs. 

Hybrid Parallelism . Hybrid parallelism integrates data, ten-sor, and pipeline parallelism to efficiently train ultra-large-scale models, such as those with hundreds of billions of pa-rameters, as exemplified by 3D parallelism [33]. 

2) Mixed-Precision Training 

During large-scale model training, GPU memory consump-tion primarily arises from four components: model parame-ters, optimizer states, intermediate activations, and temporary buffers. To address this constraint, mixed precision training has evolved from an optional optimization to a pivotal strat-egy for large-scale model development. It effectively over-comes critical bottlenecks in GPU memory and computa-tional throughput by utilizing lower-precision formats for most operations ( e.g ., matrix multiplications) to reduce mem-ory usage and accelerate computation. To preserve numerical stability, a master copy of the weights is maintained in a 32-bit floating point (FP32) for gradient accumulation and parameter updates. Additionally, loss scaling is applied: the loss is multiplied by a scaling fac-tor before backpropagation to prevent small gradients from vanishing in FP16, and these gradients are unscaled before updating the master weights. In practice, studies such as [105] have adopted FP16 or Brain Floating Point (BF16) [34] for-mats, significantly decreasing memory usage while maintain-ing training performance. Transformer          

> Block
> XAB
> Prefix
> (a) Prompt-based Tuning (b) Adapter Tuning (c) Low-Rank Adaptation Adapter Series Parallel Adapter Pretrained Weights
> W
> Transformer Inputs Outputs
> Figure 7 Illustration of the model architectures of three different parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods: (a) Prompt-based Tuning, (b) Adapter Tuning, and (c) Low-Rank Adaptation.

3. Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning 

Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) refers to techniques that adapt large pretrained models to downstream tasks by updating only a small fraction of parameters or by insert-ing lightweight trainable modules while keeping most of the backbone frozen. The goals are to reduce training compute and memory, minimize storage and transmission of task-specific weights, and enable modular multi-task deployment. PEFT methods are widely used in language, vision, and mul-timodal models; they differ in where trainable capacity is placed (input-level prompts [35, 78, 106], modular layer in-serts [36, 107], or low-rank parameter subspaces [37, 108]), in trade-offs between parameter budget and final accuracy, and in deployment convenience. Below we summarize three common PEFT families: Prompt-based Tuning , Adapter Tun-ing , and Low-Rank Adaptation , and provide representative references for each PEFT method. 

1) Prompt-based Tuning 

Prompt-based Tuning exploits the fact that pretrained lan-guage models can often be steered toward desired down-stream behavior by suitable prompts. Early work with hand-crafted discrete prompts demonstrated strong few-shot ca-pabilities in large language models [78]. To make prompts trainable and more general, continuous (soft) prompt methods were proposed. Specifically, Prompt Tuning [35] prepends a small set of learnable embeddings to the model input and trains only those embeddings, as shown in Figure 7(a). Prefix Tuning [106] injects learnable embeddings into each transformer layer’s attention mechanism so the prefix can influence internal computations without modifying model weights. P-tuning and P-tuning v2 [57, 109] introduce richer parameterizations and optimization strategies for continuous prompts and show effectiveness across generation and clas-sification tasks. Prompt-based methods are attractive due to their minimal parameter footprint and easy per-task storage, but their effectiveness can be sensitive to model scale, prompt length, and initialization; they may underperform other PEFT methods on smaller backbones or on tasks requiring deeper representational changes. Recent work addresses multi-task prompt learning, initialization heuristics, and optimization improvements to boost stability and generalization. 

2) Adapter Tuning 

As shown in Figure 7(b), Adapter Tuning inserts com-pact, trainable adapters into frozen layers and trains only those modules. Typical adapters use a bottleneck architecture (down-projection → nonlinearity → up-projection), adding a few parameters while enabling flexible transformations of layer activations. The Series Adapter [36, 110], which places adapter blocks sequentially inside each Transformer block, was an early and widely used design. To reduce latency and preserve parallelism, Parallel Adapters [107] place a lightweight side branch that runs in parallel with the origi-nal sublayer and fuse its output with the main branch; these designs reduce inference overhead while retaining much of serial adapters’ performance. Extensions such as Adapter-Fusion [111] and related methods [112, 113] fuse multiple task adapters for transfer. Current directions include auto-mated adapter architecture search [114, 115], adapter com-pression [116], and adapting adapter ideas to vision and mul-timodal transformers [117, 118]. A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design 10 Original model  Pruned model  Teacher model              

> Distill Transfer
> Data
> Knowledge
> Student model
> (a) Quantization (b) Pruning (c) Knowledge distillation
> 0.34 3.75 3.75
> 2.7
> -4.7 0.68
> 1.12 -0.9
> 0.68
> 64 134 217
> 119
> 381
> 76 21
> 99
> Figure 8 Illustration of techniques commonly employed for model compression. Mainly include (a) quantization, (b) pruning, and (c) knowledge distillation.

3) Low-Rank Adaptation 

Low-Rank Adaptation constrains the learned update to a weight matrix to lie in a low-dimensional subspace, express-ing the update as a product of two small matrices. As shown in Figure 7(c), LoRA [37] is the canonical example. In-stead of updating a full weight matrix W , LoRA freezes 

W and learns low-rank matrices A and B so that the ef-fective weight becomes W + αAB during training (where 

α is a scaling factor). When applied to a linear projection that maps an input X via W , the LoRA update modifies this mapping to W X + αABX . LoRA is typically ap-plied to critical linear projections ( e.g ., query/key/value or feed-forward projections) in Transformer blocks. The ap-proach offers strong parameter–performance trade-offs for large models, requires little additional GPU memory, and can be merged into base weights for inference, simplifying de-ployment. Since its introduction, LoRA has inspired many variants: selective layer application [119], dynamic/adaptive rank selection [120, 121], and hybrid schemes combining LoRA with adapters or prompts [122, 123]. LoRA’s engineer-ing advantages, including compatibility, easy merging into base weights, and straightforward deployment, have driven broad industrial adoption and spurred numerous benchmarks and open-source implementations such as Hugging Face tools [124] and the PEFT library [125]. Beyond these widely used libraries, several open-source ecosystems further sim-plify LoRA-style fine-tuning. FastChat [126] provides a lightweight framework for instruction tuning and chat model serving with built-in LoRA adapter support. Unsloth [127] of-fers optimized kernels and quantized LoRA training, reduc-ing memory and compute demands. ColossalAI [128] inte-grates LoRA with system-level optimizations such as paral-lelism and memory partitioning, enabling efficient fine-tuning of large models on limited hardware. These toolkits broaden practical PEFT adoption by lowering resource requirements and easing deployment. 

4. Model and Computational Compression 

Model and computational compression aim to reduce the computational size by eliminating redundant information, thus enhancing both storage efficiency and computational performance during inference. As illustrated in Figure 8 and Figure 9, key techniques encompass low-precision quantiza-tion , model pruning , knowledge distillation , and speculative decoding . The following subsections will delve deeper into these techniques and their role in enhancing model perfor-mance during inference. 

1) Low-Precision Quantization 

Low-precision quantization has become a crucial technique for improving the training and inference efficiency of large-scale deep learning models [129]. Originally, 32-bit floating point (FP32) was the standard for model training, but the growing size of models and datasets has made its computa-tional cost prohibitive [130]. To mitigate this issue, lower-precision formats such as FP16, BF16, and more recently FP8 and INT8 have been widely adopted. These formats offer ben-efits including reduced memory consumption and faster com-putation [131]. Nevertheless, numerical overflow and pre-cision degradation remain critical challenges, especially for long-sequence training and large-scale inference tasks [132]. As quantization techniques continue to advance, several methods have been proposed to improve stability and perfor-mance. LLM.int8() [133] demonstrates that INT8 quantiza-tion can significantly reduce memory usage while preserving near-FP16 accuracy, and LLM-QAT [38] incorporates quanti-zation into training to enhance robustness to low precision. To further address instability, dynamic precision strategies such as Fallback Quantization [134] temporarily elevate precision to prevent overflow, while ShiftQuant [135] enables sub-8-bit training via gradient estimation and L1 normalization. More recently, the pursuit of extreme efficiency has spurred inter-est in INT4 and even 1-bit quantization. Frameworks such as OneBit [136] and BitNet [137] illustrate the feasibility of bi-narizing weights with minimal accuracy loss, and techniques like ParetoQ [138] and ABQ-LLM [139] explore arbitrary-bit configurations to flexibly balance precision and efficiency. 

2) Model Pruning 

Model pruning serves as a pivotal optimization strategy in large language models, enabling significant enhancements in inference speed by selectively removing less critical parame-ters while preserving core functionality [140]. This approach reduces the computational footprint during deployment, al-lowing for faster processing on resource-constrained devices without necessitating extensive retraining [141]. Recent surveys on efficient LLMs highlight pruning in-novations addressing inference bottlenecks like high FLOPs and memory demands [142, 143]. One-shot methods like SparseGPT [39] induce up to 50% sparsity in models such 11 Chinese Journal of Electronics, vol.35, no.5, pp.1-24, https://doi.org/10.23919/cje.2025.00.438 

as OPT-175B, reducing inference time via parameter elimi-nation without iterative fine-tuning, aiding latency-sensitive deployments. Activation-aware techniques like Wanda [144] prune based on weight-activation interactions, yielding 

1.24 × speedups by cutting redundant computations for dy-namic querying. Structured approaches such as SliceGPT [145] use PCA to remove low-importance components, achieving 1.87 × acceleration and 30% compression in Trans-formers, boosting scalability for mobile and distributed sys-tems. Semi-structured patterns in E-Sparse [146] align with hardware like Tensor Cores for 1.53 × throughput gains, link-ing sparsity to practical utilization. These advances miti-gate LLM inefficiencies, enabling broader use in resource-constrained environments. 

3) Knowledge Distillation 

Knowledge distillation emerges as a sophisticated refine-ment technique for large language models, facilitating ac-celerated inference by transferring distilled insights from a robust teacher model to a more compact student counter-part, thereby slashing computational demands during runtime [147, 148]. This method optimizes deployment efficiency, en-abling quicker response times on hardware with limited capa-bilities without the need for exhaustive reconfiguration [149]. Contemporary research highlights black-box and white-box strategies for boosting LLM inference velocity. For ex-ample, Orca 2 [150] uses synthetic data from teacher mod-els to enhance reasoning in smaller students, achieving 2–3 ×

gains over Vicuna on complex tasks with minimal data and 40% acceleration in reasoning pipelines. TinyLLM [40] ag-gregates multi-teacher knowledge into a small student, de-livering up to 30% inference speedup on edge devices while preserving 90% accuracy across benchmarks. DA-KD [151] applies difficulty-aware sampling to focus on challenging samples, yielding 1.8× throughput improvements for effi-cient LLMs in real-time applications like chatbots. Sym-bolic Chain-of-Thought Distillation refines symbolic reason-ing paths, allowing small models to emulate step-by-step thinking with 25% reduced latency in logical scenarios [152]. 

4) Speculative Decoding 

Speculative decoding functions as an innovative speedup tac-tic for large language models, hastening inference by em-ploying a lightweight drafter to propose token sequences that a primary verifier then assesses in parallel, thereby curtail-ing sequential computations and elevating generation rates, as shown in Figure 9. Contemporary explorations in speculative decoding for LLMs focus on draft-verification synergies to enhance throughput in resource-intensive inference. For example, Confidence-Modulated Speculative Decoding [154] applies adaptive confidence thresholds for dynamic drafting lengths, yielding up to 2.5× faster decoding in variable-context LLMs with noise robustness. Recurrent Drafter [155] uses RNN-based drafters for sequential efficiency, achieving 3×

speedups in long-form generation by cutting verification Neglected                                

> Information
> [range values [k
> for irange in (
> iin (zip xs
> LLM
> Draft Model/Retrieval Library
> for
> Token Recycling (Ours)
> for irange in (
> iin (zip keys
> LLM
> Discard
> Retrieve
> Update
> draft/candidate token
> accepted token
> rejected token
> Top-k Candidate Tokens
> Adjacency Matrix
> for ik
> ... ... ...
> (keys values
> Update
> for ... k(keys
> for ij
> ... ... ...
> (ab
> Future Generations
> Figure 9 Illustration of the speculative decoding mechanism [153]. The speculative decoding methods draft some tokens and verify them in parallel in one decoding step.

overheads in Llama variants. Efficient Multi-sample Specu-lative Decoding [156] leverages parallel sampling to raise ac-ceptance rates, providing 2.2× inference gains and reduced latency in NAACL-benchmarked LLMs. SpecEE [41] merges speculative execution with early exiting, cutting computa-tional demands by 4% and boosting on-device throughput for edge-deployed LLMs. 

IV. Green Computing AI Chips and Hardware-Software Co-Design 

As Large Language Models (LLMs) continue to scale in com-plexity and deployment, the demand for high-performance and efficient hardware has intensified. Traditional accelera-tion platforms, while effective, have exposed growing con-cerns over energy consumption, carbon emissions, and de-ployment scalability. In response, both academia and industry have invested heavily in the development of green comput-ing solutions—from architectural innovations in AI chips to sustainable data center infrastructure [157, 158]. This chapter explores the evolving landscape of AI hardware, emphasiz-ing mainstream chip ecosystems and emerging paradigms in energy-efficient hardware-software co-design. Training Inference Cloud Edge   

> NPU GPU FPGA NPU GPU ASIC ASIC CPU CPU FPGA NPU GPU ASIC CPU DSP
> Figure 10 Application Categories of AI Chips.

1. Mainstream AI Chips and Application Ecology 

1) Classification and Comparison of AI Chips 

As shown in Figure 10, AI chips can be broadly categorized based on their deployment environments ( i.e ., cloud or edge), and their computational roles in training or inference. Cen-A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design 12                                                          

> Table 3 Global Representative AI Chip Enterprises and Its Product.
> Company Typical Chips Year Arch Function International AI chip enterprises NVIDIA H100 2022 GPU cloud training AMD MI300 2023 GPU cloud training Intel Gaudi 3 2024 NPU cloud training Google TPUv5 2023 ASIC cloud training Qualcomm Cloud AI100 2020 ASIC cloud inference Apple M3 2023 ARM edge inference Samsung Exynos 2100 2021 ARM edge inference IBM TrueNorth 2015 –edge inference Domestic AI chip enterprises Cambricon MLU 590 2024 ASIC cloud training HUAWEI Ascend 910 2019 NPU cloud training Horizon Journey 6 2023 ARM edge inference T-head Hanguang 800 2019 FPGA cloud inference Baidu Kunlun 2 2022 FPGA cloud inference

tral Processing Units (CPUs), while flexible, are generally inefficient for large-scale matrix operations. Graphics Pro-cessing Units (GPUs), such as NVIDIA’s A100 and H100, have become the de facto standard for training LLMs due to their massive parallelism and rich software ecosystem ( e.g ., CUDA). Tensor Processing Units (TPUs) [43], developed by Google, are custom ASICs optimized for matrix multiplica-tion and serve as a backbone for models like GPT and PaLM. Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) offer reconfigura-bility and are well-suited for edge inference but require sig-nificant design effort [159]. Digital Signal Processors (DSPs) and Application-Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) provide optimized performance for specific workloads, especially in low-power scenarios [42]. 

2) Global AI Chip Ecosystems 

As shown in Tab. 3, leading international companies such as NVIDIA, Google, AMD, and Intel dominate the AI hardware market. Firstly, NVIDIA’s GPU platform combines rapidly evolving silicon architectures, such as Ampere, Hopper, and Blackwell, with a vertically integrated software stack, in-cluding CUDA, CUTLASS, cuBLAS/cuDNN, NCCL, and Triton Inference Server, and system-level interconnects like NVLink and NVSwitch, enabling scalable training across tens of thousands of accelerators. Secondly, Google’s TPU series [43], from TPU v2/v3 to v5, demonstrates the data-center efficiency of AI-specific ASICs by leveraging systolic matrix engines, wafer-scale torus interconnects, and optical circuit switches for dynamic topology reconfiguration. These innovations achieve high model FLOPs utilization in large-scale training while minimizing energy consumption per op-eration. Google integrates TPUs into its cloud infrastructure, supporting the training of cutting-edge models such as Gem-ini [160]. Meanwhile, AMD’s MI300 series and Intel’s Gaudi 3 accelerators are broadening the competitive landscape by emphasizing mixed-precision computing and energy-aware scheduling. These platforms are supported by comprehensive toolchains and SDKs that enable developers to optimize LLM workloads across both training and inference stages [161]. 

3) Domestic AI Chip Development and Ecosystems 

As shown in Tab. 3, China’s AI chip ecosystem has diversi-fied across cloud and edge scenarios [161]. Cloud- and edge-oriented NPUs from Cambricon [44] ( e.g ., MLU series) tar-get training and inference with compiler toolchains and oper-ator libraries integrated into domestic AI frameworks. Hori-zon Robotics focuses on edge autonomy with high-efficiency SoCs (Journey/Sunrise), combining perception and planning accelerators for automotive ADAS/AD. Huawei’s Ascend (e.g ., 910/310) provides a vertically integrated stack for cloud and edge with the CANN/AscendCL toolchain, MindSpore framework, and model zoo integration; the series have been deployed for general AI services and domain-specific infer-ence. In special-purpose domains, Bitmain’s experience in ultra–high-efficiency matrix engines informs inference ASIC design practices, while T-Head (Alibaba) advances RISC-V based CPUs (XuanTie) and cloud inference chips (Hanguang) within a broader open-source and cloud ecosystem. These vendors are increasingly developing end-to-end stacks, in-cluding compilers, graph optimization, quantization, and run-times, as software maturity has become a decisive factor in achieving effective energy efficiency at the application level 

4) Energy and Performance Perspectives 

The energy efficiency of AI chips is an increasingly crit-ical metric, often measured in TOPS/W (Tera-operations per Second per Watt). For instance, while NVIDIA’s H100 achieves state-of-the-art throughput, its power envelope ex-ceeds 700W, posing challenges for widespread deployment. In contrast, edge ASICs like those from Bitmain or Apple’s Neural Engine offer much higher energy efficiency for infer-ence. The software stack plays a pivotal role in green com-puting. Frameworks like TensorRT, TVM, and MindSpore enable operator-level optimizations, while sparsity-aware li-braries reduce redundant computation. Matching model ar-chitecture ( e.g ., Transformer variants) to chip capabilities is essential for maximizing energy-performance trade-offs. 

2. Inference memory optimization 

Inference memory optimization serves as a critical advance-ment in large language models, achieved through software-hardware co-design that accelerates inference by dynamically reallocating storage resources via intelligent caching mecha-nisms and offloading inactive data to secondary storage lay-ers, thereby reducing peak memory demands without sacri-ficing throughput. Key strategies encompass KV cache opti-mization, memory offloading, and early exiting. 

1) KV Cache Optimization 

KV cache optimization emerges as a pivotal accelera-tion technique in large language models, realized through software-hardware co-design that boosts inference efficiency by compressing key-value stores using selective retention and precision reduction methods, thereby mitigating mem-ory bottlenecks in long sequences while preserving accuracy [163, 164]. Fig. 11 demonstrates the key-value cache usage in 13 Chinese Journal of Electronics, vol.35, no.5, pp.1-24, https://doi.org/10.23919/cje.2025.00.438 Initialization     

> Queries Keys Softmax Values Result
> Key -Value Cache
> Cache Cache

Decoding       

> Softmax Values
> Result
> Retrieve Update Retrieve Update
> Queries Keys
> Figure 11 Illustration of the key-value caching mechanism [162].

both phases. During the initialization phase, the LLM gener-ates the key-value cache for each token in the input prompt. In the subsequent decoding phase, the LLM only needs to com-pute the query, key, and value of one newly generated token, leveraging the precomputed key-value cache to facilitate the process step by step. Research on LLM-accelerated KV cache optimization categorizes strategies into tag-level eviction and model-level quantization, using hardware-aware designs to reduce memory overhead in long-context scenarios. For instance, CacheGen [165] applies custom tensor encoding via dis-tributional properties, enabling 2-4 × faster context loading and streaming for Llama-2-70B in high-throughput serving. LaCache [45] uses ladder-shaped caching with training-free hierarchical retention, boosting inference speed by 1.5-2 ×

and reducing cache size by 40% for Mistral-7B in long-sequence generation. FastGen [166] employs LLM profil-ing for adaptive compression across attention heads, halving memory usage without quality loss and accelerating decod-ing by 30% in dynamic workloads. Gao et al. propose hy-brid sparsity-quantization frameworks, achieving up to 3×

throughput gains by minimizing recomputation in extended contexts [167]. 

2) Memory Offloading 

Memory offloading emerges as a pivotal technique for accel-erating LLM inference on resource-constrained hardware, re-alized through software-hardware co-design that enables the execution of massive models by dynamically swapping pa-rameters between high-speed GPU memory and slower but more capacious external storage such as CPU DRAM or NVMe SSDs [168]. Recent advancements refine offloading strategies to bal-ance bandwidth and compute demands. For example, Aqua [46] employs network acceleration in multi-GPU clusters to cut paging overheads in inference state transfers, achieving up to 2× speedups via RDMA weight prefetching. HeadInfer [47] uses head-wise KV cache offloading, partitioning atten-tion heads across devices to reduce full-layer storage and in-crease memory efficiency by 40% without accuracy loss. For MoE architectures, a latency-hiding scheme [169] overlaps expert activations with data transfers, minimizing idle times for seamless scaling on heterogeneous setups. SpecOffload [170] applies speculative partial offloading to tap underused GPU capacity, predicting and caching low-activation param-eters on CPU for 1.5-3× faster iterative decoding. Comple-mentary methods, such as heterogeneous speculative decod-ing, multilevel pretraining offloads, and dynamic token prun-ing, illustrate the growing inference optimization ecosystem. 

3) Early Exiting for Inference Acceleration 

Early exiting has become a cornerstone of conditional com-putation in LLM inference acceleration, dynamically halting autoregressive decoding at intermediate layers when token predictions meet predefined confidence criteria, thus curb-ing computational overhead and enabling real-time applica-tions on diverse hardware without compromising semantic integrity [171]. Over the past few years, innovations like AdaInfer [48] and FREE [172] have paved the way for more adaptive mech-anisms, while broader efforts in speculative integration en-hance throughput. SpecEE [41] deploys a speculation-driven engine that anticipates exit points via auxiliary predictors, verifying drafts in parallel to yield up to 2.5× faster gen-eration on GPUs by minimizing redundant layer traversals. Finally, SPADE introduces a hybrid algorithm fusing con-fidence monitoring with space-aligned decoding, projecting intermediate states to align with deeper representations and enabling seamless exits that preserve coherence, boosting ef-ficiency by 2× in edge deployments [173]. 

3. Cross-platform deployment and adaptation 

Cross-platform deployment and adaptation for large-scale models facilitates efficient execution across heterogeneous hardware like CPUs, GPUs, and edge devices by addressing compatibility and optimization challenges through three core strategies: unified inference frameworks, automatic operator scheduling, and key operator discretization. The following subsections explore these techniques and their impacts on model performance. 

1) Unified Inference Framework 

Unified inference frameworks streamline LLM cross-platform deployment by abstracting hardware details into a cohesive API, enabling seamless transitions across CPUs, GPUs, and edge devices while maintaining performance. Key approaches include LLMBox [49], which unifies training, inference, and evaluation pipelines with modular ex-tensions for backends like PyTorch and TensorRT to reduce deployment overheads. HERMES [174] supports multi-stage pipelines with heterogeneous clients, dynamically batching requests across concurrent models to optimize distributed resource use. ScaleLLM [175] emphasizes end-to-end effi-ciency via operator fusion and paged attention for scalable serving beyond standard inference. Together, these reduce porting efforts by up to 50% in multi-tenant settings. Edge A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design 14 

latency-aware LLM customization [176] uses distillation in unified backends for privacy-preserving inference on con-strained hardware. Overall, these frameworks boost adapt-ability, yielding 2-3× throughput improvements across ARM and x86 ecosystems. 

2) Automatic Operator Scheduling 

Automatic operator scheduling optimizes LLM inference by dynamically allocating computational kernels to heteroge-neous hardware, mitigating bottlenecks in cross-platform ex-ecution through runtime profiling and predictive mapping. The Past-Future Scheduler in LightLLM [50] balances historical and speculative workloads under SLA constraints, prioritizing token sequences to improve goodput by 1.5× in shared clusters. Decentralized serving task scheduling [177] applies heuristic algorithms to distribute inference across edge nodes, enabling fault-tolerant adaptation for large-scale deployments. DynamoLLM [178] uses reconfiguration loops to optimize cluster topologies for energy efficiency, aligning operator dispatch with SLOs through reinforcement learning policies. These approaches handle multi-tenancy by integrat-ing scheduling with KV cache management. 

3) Key Operator Discretization 

Key operator discretization enhances cross-platform LLM adaptation by decomposing complex kernels into modular, hardware-agnostic units, allowing fine-grained quantization and fusion for efficient porting across accelerators. ClusterFusion [179] scales fusion primitives to cluster-level operators, discretizing attention and linear layers for distributed inference with 2× memory savings. FlashDe-coding++ [180] uses asynchronous kernel fusion in LLM decoding, discretizing GEMM operations for flat optimiza-tion and heuristic prefetching. Qtile [51] accelerates quan-tized serving through tile-based operator discretization, in-tegrating low-bit formats with fusion to minimize overhead in multi-precision setups and mitigate variances on ARM and NVIDIA hardware. KPerfIR [52] advances a compiler-centric ecosystem for GPU kernel fusion, discretizing op-erators via 4D parallelism to balance workloads in LLM pipelines. These methods emphasize hardware-agnostic op-timizations, enabling broader LLM accessibility in diverse computational environments. 

4. Energy-Efficient Hardware System 

Beyond AI chips, some hardware directions are seeking step-function improvements in performance per watt by reduc-ing energy consumption associated with data movement and cooling, and by tailoring computation to model structure. 

1) Emerging Green Chip Technologies 

To overcome the limitations of the Von Neumann architec-ture, where data shuttling between memory and compute units incurs substantial energy overhead, In-Memory Com-puting (IMC) has emerged as a promising alternative [181]. IMC performs computation within the memory array it-self, significantly reducing data movement. Architectures like TranCIM, RIME, and SmartInfinity showcase how compute-in-memory enables energy-efficient matrix operations, partic-ularly for low-bit quantized models. Additionally, neuromor-phic chips [53] such as IBM’s TrueNorth and Intel’s Loihi simulate brain-like spiking neuron behavior [182], enabling ultra-low-power inference. Optical computing and quantum accelerators also show promise, though they remain in ex-perimental stages [183]. These paradigm-shifting technolo-gies aim to support future LLMs with orders-of-magnitude improvements in energy efficiency. 

2) Decentralized Green Learning 

Decentralized learning paradigms further reduce the environ-mental cost of AI by curbing data movement and right-sizing compute. Federated Learning (FL) offers a distributed train-ing paradigm where models are trained locally on edge de-vices and only parameter updates are exchanged. This ap-proach not only enhances data privacy but also minimizes the need for large-scale data transmission to central servers, reducing overall energy consumption [184]. Recent studies show that federated fine-tuning of LMs can lead to competi-tive performance with significantly lower compute and com-munication costs, especially when combined with techniques like LoRA and quantization-aware training. Besides, collabo-rative inference systems like PETALS [54] propose decentral-ized model hosting, where users share compute workloads, enhancing both accessibility and sustainability. 

3) Green Data Centers 

Data centers hosting LLM workloads must address their rapidly growing carbon footprints [55]. One strategy is geo-graphical optimization, whereby data centers are located near renewable energy sources—such as hydropower in Sichuan, geothermal in Iceland, or solar farms in the American South-west [6]. China’s “East Data, West Computing” initiative ex-emplifies this approach, relocating compute-intensive LLM training to western regions with abundant green energy [56]. Moreover, natural cooling strategies, including the use of am-bient air or seawater for thermal management, are replacing traditional air-conditioning systems. Innovations in liquid im-mersion cooling and heat reuse ( e.g ., district heating) further contribute to reducing the energy overhead of data center op-erations. 

V. AI for Sustainability Applications 

As large models continue to evolve in scale and complexity, their potential to contribute to global sustainability efforts is becoming increasingly evident. Beyond concerns over their own carbon footprint, large models and AI systems are now being actively deployed to empower sustainable practices across multiple domains. This chapter explores recent ad-vancements in AI applications for sustainability, focusing on efficient model architectures, high-throughput remote sens-ing, national-scale computing infrastructures, and domain-specific green innovations. 15 Chinese Journal of Electronics, vol.35, no.5, pp.1-24, https://doi.org/10.23919/cje.2025.00.438 

1. Parallel Training and RL-Driven Reasoning Paradigm 

DeepSeek [185] exemplifies a dual focus on efficient large-model training and inference. In training, it leverages multi-level parallelism, including tensor, pipeline, and data paral-lelism, coupled with latency-hiding kernels, operator fusion, and topology-aware communication. These techniques max-imize GPU utilization and minimize memory and communi-cation overhead, aligning with best practices for distributed LLM training [8]. On the inference side, DeepSeek adopts reinforcement learning at scale to improve reasoning effi-ciency. By learning structured decision-making policies and task-specific tool usage, the model reduces redundant com-putation and improves output quality per token and per joule. This approach reflects a broader trend: sustainable AI increas-ingly enhances energy efficiency through co-optimized train-ing pipelines and inference-time policy learning, rather than relying solely on raw compute scaling [186]. 

2. Remote Sensing Interpretation: RS-vHeat and “Aerospace·Lingmou” 3.0 

Remote sensing workloads require high-throughput, energy-efficient inference across multi-sensor platforms under strin-gent latency and power constraints. RS-vHeat [62] addresses these challenges through a physics-inspired architecture that models semantic propagation as heat diffusion [11]. Devel-oped around the “Aerospace·Lingmou” 3.0 kernel, it replaces global attention with localized heat conduction operators, sig-nificantly reducing memory traffic while maintaining global receptive fields. This physical inductive bias enhances local-ity, facilitates aggressive kernel fusion and cache reuse, and achieves substantial efficiency gains: 84% memory reduction, 24% lower FLOPs, and 2.7 × higher throughput compared to attention-based models, while maintaining state-of-the-art performance across optical, SAR, thermal, and hyperspectral modalities. The compact design enables efficient edge de-ployment and federated learning, reducing cloud dependency and emissions. 

3. China Computing NET (C 2NET): A National-Scale Sustainable Infrastructure 

C2NET envisions a unified, sovereign “compute network” that interconnects heterogeneous compute (GPU, NPU, CPU, FPGA) via high-speed links and programmable schedul-ing, providing on-demand, policy-aware capacity to na-tional strategic workloads. As the digital economy’s sub-strate, C 2NET targets holistic sustainability in three direc-tions. First, siting and energy: it supports “East Data, West Computing”, placing resource-hungry clusters near renew-able resources and abundant land while serving coastal de-mand over high-performance backbones, cutting carbon in-tensity and land use [56]. Second, orchestration: traffic- and topology-aware schedulers allocate tasks to the cleanest, clos-est, and least-congested sites, maximizing MFU and min-imizing network energy per job [8]. Third, openness and resilience: a standardized interface for resource discovery, carbon-aware scheduling, and privacy-preserving execution (e.g ., federated analytics) lowers barriers to sharing clean ca-pacity nationwide. As a result, C 2NET not only decarbonizes supply (clean power) but also demand, turning compute into a managed utility with sustainability service-level objectives. 

4. Google and Meta: Full-Stack Optimization for Sus-tainable AI 

Leading technology companies such as Google [187] and Meta [188] have pioneered full-stack optimizations to ad-vance sustainable AI development. Google’s Gemini system [160] integrates accelerator-level telemetry, dynamic model routing, and carbon-aware data center scheduling, achiev-ing a 44 × reduction in per-prompt emissions within one year. Meta, formerly Facebook AI, implements end-to-end carbon accounting across all stages of the model lifecy-cle, from training to inference, while leveraging flash atten-tion, quantization, and sparsity-based techniques to reduce computational demands. Beyond infrastructure optimization, both companies deploy large-scale models for sustainability-critical applications, including climate forecasting, water consumption prediction, and disaster response. These initia-tives illustrate how improvements in system-level efficiency, combined with AI-for-good applications, can collectively en-able scalable and environmentally responsible AI develop-ment. 

5. Global AI Applications for Multi-Domain Sustainabil-ity 

Artificial Intelligence is increasingly recognized as a global enabler of sustainability across multiple domains. In energy systems , AI techniques are used for smart grid optimization, dynamic load balancing, and predictive maintenance of re-newable infrastructure worldwide [189]. In materials science ,machine learning accelerates the discovery of photovoltaic and battery materials through high-throughput simulations and generative models, supported by initiatives from the EU and Department of Energy. In climate science , AI enhances the resolution of global climate models via downscaling, improving local policy rel-evance and disaster preparedness [190]. Organizations like NASA and the UN leverage AI-powered early warning sys-tems for floods, wildfires, and hurricanes. Meanwhile, AI-for-code research, including AlphaCode [191], shows that LLMs can generate energy-efficient software that reduces runtime energy by 10–20%, promoting greener engineering work-flows [192]. These global efforts illustrate how AI not only re-duces its own footprint but also amplifies sustainability across science, infrastructure, and digital ecosystems. 

VI. Discussion and Future Outlook 

While significant progress has been made in the design of ef-ficient model architectures, the optimization of deployment A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design 16 

pipelines, and the development of green AI hardware, many open challenges still remain unresolved. This section pro-vides a reflective discussion on the key limitations and out-lines forward-looking perspectives that may define the next phase of green LLM development. 

1. Learning without Starting Over: Continual, Incre-mental, and Federated Training 

A significant proportion of the carbon footprint associated with LLMs stems from the repeated re-training of monolithic architectures. A more sustainable learning paradigm priori-tizes “learning without starting over.” Continual and incre-mental learning [193–196], under conditions of model ho-mogeneity, heterogeneity, and modality expansion, should be established as core training paradigms rather than secondary considerations. Promising approaches include: ( i) elastic pa-rameter partitioning through sparse or adaptive subnetworks that localize model updates and mitigate catastrophic for-getting; ( ii ) retrieval-augmented pretraining and fine-tuning, which externalize knowledge updates into lightweight, muta-ble indices instead of relying on full-scale weight reconfigu-ration; and ( iii ) federated and split learning frameworks that enable the exchange of sparsified, differentially private model updates, with provable convergence even under straggler ef-fects and non-IID data distributions. Compiler and runtime systems can further support sustainability by identifying and freezing “stable” layers, scheduling updates only for “plastic” regions. Energy-aware Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) and optimization techniques can penal-ize computationally intensive update pathways. Collectively, these strategies reduce lifecycle emissions by replacing peri-odic, resource-intensive model overhauls with targeted, veri-fiable, and minimal parameter updates. 

2. Beyond GPUs: Co-Designing Models with Memory-and Physics-Centric Compute 

Achieving step-function gains in energy efficiency re-quires tighter model–hardware fusion and new substrates. Memory-centric compute ( e.g ., computing near-/in-memory, CNM/CIM) can collapse the von Neumann bottleneck in bandwidth-limited layers (attention/MLP) if models adopt sparsity/low-rank formats and compilers provide calibra-tion and error-aware schedules. Neuromorphic/event-driven units are effective for sparse perception and on-device intelligent agents, while photonic interconnects promise ultra-low-energy data movement and, in the longer term, en-able analog matrix computation. Quantum accelerators re-main in early exploration. Critically, models must be co-designed with these emerging hardware platforms in mind: state-space models ( e.g ., Mamba) that scale linearly with se-quence length, and modular routing mechanisms that mini-mize data movement, etc . A unified Intermediate Representa-tion (IR) that explicitly captures data movement metrics, such as bytes per operation and data residency levels, combined with autotuners capable of jointly optimizing precision, spar-sity, and memory placement, can pave the way for scalable and energy-efficient heterogeneous computing. 

3. Edge AI: Efficiency on Constrained Devices 

Deploying large models on edge devices remains challeng-ing due to hardware limitations, computational constraints, high energy consumption, and heterogeneous environments. Future advancements will rely on new approaches beyond existing popular techniques like model compression, prun-ing, and quantization. For example, neuromorphic comput-ing, with brain-inspired architectures, will deliver signifi-cantly higher energy efficiency and real-time processing for cognitive tasks through parallel and event-driven operation. Furthermore, quantum neural networks and mobile quantum processing units could revolutionize edge AI by leveraging quantum properties to process massive datasets and optimize decisions at unprecedented speeds, potentially enabling hy-brid quantum-classical AI for real-time applications. The syn-ergy with 6G networks will be critical, providing the ultra-low latency and high-speed connectivity required for syn-chronizing AI across large-scale Internet of Things systems (IoT). Finally, the rise of edge-native AI models optimized for on-device use will reduce cloud dependency and enable more advanced, self-sufficient edge applications. 

4. Standardized and Unified Evaluation 

Equally critical is the lack of standardized, comprehensive benchmarks for evaluating the resource efficiency of large models. Many existing metrics, such as FLOPs, parameter count, or model size, only capture isolated dimensions of effi-ciency and fail to reflect the complex trade-offs between per-formance and resource consumption. Moreover, differences in hardware configurations, evaluation protocols, and report-ing standards make it difficult to compare methods fairly. This fragmentation hinders progress and obscures the real-world impact of proposed optimizations. A more holistic evaluation framework is needed, one that incorporates not only com-putational and memory efficiency but also energy consump-tion, carbon emissions, and lifecycle sustainability. Emerg-ing tools such as CodeCarbon [197] and experiment-impact-tracker offer promising directions for measuring environmen-tal impact, while performance-efficiency Pareto frontiers pro-vide a principled lens for evaluating trade-offs. Moving for-ward, the community would greatly benefit from a unified benchmark suite that supports multi-dimensional evaluation across diverse deployment contexts and model sizes. 

VII. Conclusion 

The era of large-scale AI models has brought transforma-tive advances across natural language processing, computer vision, and scientific discovery. However, these advance-ments entail unprecedented computational and energy de-mands. This survey explores the green development path 17 Chinese Journal of Electronics, vol.35, no.5, pp.1-24, https://doi.org/10.23919/cje.2025.00.438 

of large models, covering efficient architectures, optimized training and inference, hardware-software co-design, and sustainability-driven applications. We review advances like sparse activation, physics-inspired modeling, dynamic data selection, and parameter-efficient fine-tuning, which reduce resource usage while maintaining performance. On the hardware side, we analyze energy-efficient AI chips, memory-centric computing, and decentralized learning systems that lower environmental im-pact. We also highlight AI’s growing role in sustainability do-mains, including remote sensing and green infrastructure. Looking ahead, we advocate for a shift toward lifecycle-aware model development, standardized efficiency bench-marks, and co-designed algorithm–hardware systems. Em-bedding environmental responsibility at every layer of AI de-velopment will ensure that future models are not only more powerful but also more sustainable and widely accessible. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Sci-ence Foundation of China under Grant 62536003, and also in part by the Major Key Project of Pengcheng Laboratory under Grant PCL2025A14. 

References 

[1] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, et al. , “Attention is all you need”, Advances in neural information processing systems , in press, 2017. [2] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding”, in Pro-ceedings of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics , 2019. [3] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, et al. , “Learning trans-ferable visual models from natural language supervision”, in Interna-tional conference on machine learning , PmLR, pp.8748–8763, 2021. [4] B. Lin, Z. Tang, Y. Ye, J. Cui, et al. , “Moe-llava: Mixture of experts for large vision-language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15947 ,in press, 2024. [5] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, et al. , “Gpt-4 technical report”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , in press, 2023. [6] A. Radovanovi´ c, R. Koningstein, I. Schneider, B. Chen, et al. ,“Carbon-aware computing for datacenters”, IEEE Transactions on Power Systems , vol.38, no.2, pp.1270–1280, 2022. [7] C. Guo, F. Cheng, Z. Du, J. Kiessling, et al. , “A survey: Collaborative hardware and software design in the era of large language models”, 

IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine , vol.25, no.1, pp.35–57, 2025. [8] J. Duan, S. Zhang, Z. Wang, L. Jiang, et al. , “Efficient training of large language models on distributed infrastructures: A survey”, 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.20018 , in press, 2024. [9] L. Shen, Y. Sun, Z. Yu, L. Ding, et al. , “On efficient training of large-scale deep learning models”, ACM Computing Surveys , vol.57, no.3, pp.1–36, 2024. [10] G. Bai, Z. Chai, C. Ling, S. Wang, et al. , “Beyond efficiency: A sys-tematic survey of resource-efficient large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00625 , in press, 2024. [11] Z. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Tian, Y. Liu, et al. , “Building vision models upon heat conduction”, in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp.9707–9717, 2025. [12] Y. Liu, Y. Tian, Y. Zhao, H. Yu, et al. , “Vmamba: Visual state space model”, Advances in neural information processing systems , in press, 2024. [13] A. Katharopoulos, A. Vyas, N. Pappas, and F. Fleuret, “Transformers are rnns: Fast autoregressive transformers with linear attention”, in 

International conference on machine learning , 2020. [14] T. Dao, D. Fu, S. Ermon, A. Rudra, and C. R´ e, “Flashattention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with io-awareness”, Advances in neural information processing systems , in press, 2022. [15] T. Dao, “Flashattention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08691 , in press, 2023. [16] J. Shah, G. Bikshandi, Y. Zhang, V. Thakkar, et al. , “Flashattention-3: Fast and accurate attention with asynchrony and low-precision”, 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , in press, 2024. [17] B. Peng, E. Alcaide, Q. Anthony, A. Albalak, et al. , “Rwkv: Rein-venting rnns for the transformer era”, in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , 2023. [18] Y. Sun, L. Dong, S. Huang, S. Ma, et al. , “Retentive network: A successor to transformer for large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08621 , in press, 2023. [19] R. Jacobs, M. Jordan, S. Nowlan, and G. Hinton, “Adaptive mixtures of local experts”, Neural Computation , in press, 1991. [20] N. Shazeer, A. Mirhoseini, et al. , “Outrageously large neural net-works: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer”, in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. [21] D. Lepikhin, H. Lee, Y. Xu, D. Chen, et al. , “Gshard: Scaling giant models with conditional computation and automatic sharding”, in In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [22] E. Yang, L. Shen, G. Guo, X. Wang, et al. , “Model merging in llms, mllms, and beyond: Methods, theories, applications and opportuni-ties”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07666 , in press, 2024. [23] J. Rao, X. Liu, H. Deng, Z. Lin, et al. , “Dynamic sampling that adapts: Iterative dpo for self-aware mathematical reasoning”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.16176 , in press, 2025. [24] T. Nguyen, Z. Chen, and J. Lee, “Dataset meta-learning from kernel ridge-regression”, in International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2021. [25] Y. Zhou, E. Nezhadarya, and J. Ba, “Dataset distillation using neu-ral feature regression”, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , in press, 2022. [26] N. Loo, R. Hasani, A. Amini, and D. Rus, “Efficient dataset distilla-tion using random feature approximation”, Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , in press, 2022. [27] C. Guo, B. Zhao, and Y. Bai, “Deepcore: A comprehensive library for coreset selection in deep learning”, in International Conference on Database and Expert Systems Applications , pp.181–195, 2022. [28] S. Li, Y. Zhao, R. Varma, O. Salpekar, et al. , “Pytorch distributed: Experiences on accelerating data parallel training”, Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , vol.13, no.12, pp.3005–3018, 2020. [29] S. Rajbhandari, J. Rasley, O. Ruwase, and Y. He, “Zero: Memory op-timizations toward training trillion parameter models”, in SC20: In-ternational Conference for High Performance Computing, Network-ing, Storage and Analysis , IEEE, pp.1–16, 2020. [30] J. Rasley, S. Rajbhandari, O. Ruwase, and Y. He, “Deepspeed: System optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 bil-lion parameters”, in Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD interna-tional conference on knowledge discovery & data mining , pp.3505– 3506, 2020. [31] M. Shoeybi, M. Patwary, R. Puri, P. LeGresley, et al. , “Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism”, arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053 , in press, 2019. [32] Y. Huang, Y. Cheng, A. Bapna, O. Firat, et al. , “Gpipe: Efficient train-A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design 18 

ing of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism”, Advances in neural information processing systems , vol.32, 2019. [33] D. Narayanan, M. Shoeybi, J. Casper, P. LeGresley, et al. , “Efficient large-scale language model training on gpu clusters using megatron-lm”, in SC21: International Conference for High Performance Com-puting, Networking, Storage and Analysis , IEEE, pp.1–14, 2021. [34] B. Workshop, T. L. Scao, A. Fan, C. Akiki, et al. , “Bloom: A 176b-parameter open-access multilingual language model”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05100 , in press, 2022. [35] B. Lester, R. Al-Rfou, and N. Constant, “The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt tuning”, in Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2021. [36] N. Houlsby, A. Giurgiu, S. Jastrzebski, B. Morrone, et al. ,“Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp”, in International con-ference on machine learning , pp.2790–2799, 2019. [37] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, et al. , “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.”, International Conference on Learning Representations , vol.1, no.2, artilce no.3, 2022. [38] Z. Liu, B. Oguz, C. Zhao, E. Chang, et al. , “Llm-qat: Data-free quan-tization aware training for large language models”, in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024 , pp.467–484, 2024. [39] E. Frantar and D. Alistarh, “Sparsegpt: Massive language models can be accurately pruned in one-shot”, in International conference on ma-chine learning , 2023. [40] S. V. Kandala, P. Medaranga, and A. Varshney, “Tinyllm: A frame-work for training and deploying language models at the edge com-puters”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15304 , in press, 2024. [41] J. Xu, J. Pan, Y. Zhou, S. Chen, et al. , “Specee: Accelerating large lan-guage model inference with speculative early exiting”, in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architec-ture , pp.467–481, 2025. [42] Y. Hu, Y. Liu, and Z. Liu, “A survey on convolutional neural network accelerators: Gpu, fpga and asic”, in 2022 14th International Con-ference on Computer Research and Development (ICCRD) , IEEE, pp.100–107, 2022. [43] N. P. Jouppi, C. Young, N. Patil, D. Patterson, et al. , “In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor processing unit”, in Proceedings of the 44th annual international symposium on computer architecture ,pp.1–12, 2017. [44] S. Liu, Z. Du, J. Tao, D. Han, et al. , “Cambricon: An instruction set architecture for neural networks”, ACM SIGARCH Computer Archi-tecture News , vol.44, no.3, pp.393–405, 2016. [45] D. Shi, Y. Fu, X. Yuan, Z. Yu, et al. , “Lacache: Ladder-shaped kv caching for efficient long-context modeling of large language mod-els”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.14204 , in press, 2025. [46] A. Vijaya Kumar, G. Antichi, and R. Singh, “Aqua: Network-accelerated memory offloading for llms in scale-up gpu domains”, in 

Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architec-tural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 , pp.48–62, 2025. [47] C. Luo, Z. Cai, H. Sun, J. Xiao, et al. , “Headinfer: Memory-efficient llm inference by head-wise offloading”, in ICML 2025 Workshop on Long-Context Foundation Models , . [48] S. Fan, X. Jiang, X. Li, X. Meng, et al. , “Not all layers of llms are nec-essary during inference”, in Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Inter-national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pp.5083–5091, 2025. [49] T. Tang, H. Yiwen, B. Li, W. Luo, et al. , “Llmbox: A comprehensive library for large language models”, in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pp.388– 399, 2024. [50] R. Gong, S. Bai, S. Wu, Y. Fan, et al. , “Past-future scheduler for llm serving under sla guarantees”, in Proceedings of the 30th ACM In-ternational Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 , pp.798–813, 2025. [51] Q. Zhang, M. Zhai, R. Sun, and J. Zhai, “Qfactory: Accelerating quantized large language model serving with qtile graphs”, in 2025 USENIX Annual Technical Conference , pp.631–646, 2025. [52] Y. Guan, Y. Fang, K. Zhou, C. Robeck, et al. , “Kperfir: Towards an open and compiler-centric ecosystem for gpu kernel performance tooling on modern ai workloads”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21661 ,in press, 2025. [53] A. Basu, L. Deng, C. Frenkel, and X. Zhang, “Spiking neural network integrated circuits: A review of trends and future directions”, in 2022 IEEE custom integrated circuits conference (CICC) , IEEE, pp.1–8, 2022. [54] A. Borzunov, D. Baranchuk, T. Dettmers, M. Riabinin, et al. , “Petals: Collaborative inference and fine-tuning of large models”, in Proceed-ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations) , pp.558–568, 2023. [55] Z. Cao, X. Zhou, X. Wu, Z. Zhu, et al. , “Data center sustainability: Revisits and outlooks”, IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Comput-ing , vol.9, no.3, pp.236–248, 2023. [56] Y. Zhang, H. Li, and S. Wang, “Decarbonizing data centers through regional bits migration: A comprehensive assessment of china’s ‘east-ern data, western computing’initiative and its global implications”, 

Applied Energy , vol.392, artilce no.126020, 2025. [57] X. Liu, Y. Zheng, Z. Du, M. Ding, et al. , “Gpt understands, too”, AI Open , vol.5, pp.208–215, 2024. [58] S. Wang, B. Z. Li, M. Khabsa, H. Fang, and H. Ma, “Linformer: Self-attention with linear complexity”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04768 ,in press, 2020. [59] I. Schlag, K. Irie, and J. Schmidhuber, “Linear transformers are se-cretly fast weight programmers”, in International conference on ma-chine learning , pp.9355–9366, 2021. [60] A. Anthropic, “The claude 3 model family: Opus, sonnet, haiku”, 

Claude-3 Model Card , vol.1, no.1, artilce no.4, 2024. [61] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, et al. , “Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 , in press, 2023. [62] H. Hu, P. Wang, H. Bi, B. Tong, et al. , “Rs-vheat: Heat conduction guided efficient remote sensing foundation model”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.17984 , in press, 2024. [63] A. Gu, K. Goel, and C. R´ e, “Efficiently modeling long sequences with structured state spaces”, in International Conference on Learn-ing Representations , 2022. [64] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00752 , in press, 2023. [65] D. Dai, C. Deng, C. Zhao, R. X. Xu, et al. , “Deepseekmoe: Towards ultimate expert specialization in mixture-of-experts language mod-els”, in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pp.1280–1297, 2024. [66] J. Puigcerver, C. R. Ruiz, B. Mustafa, and N. Houlsby, “From sparse to soft mixtures of experts”, in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [67] X. Wang, F. Yu, L. Dunlap, Y.-A. Ma, et al. , “Deep mixture of ex-perts via shallow embedding”, in Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli-gence , pp.552–562, 2020. [68] H. Tang, J. Liu, M. Zhao, and X. Gong, “Progressive layered extrac-tion (ple): A novel multi-task learning (mtl) model for personalized recommendations”, in Proceedings of the 14th ACM conference on recommender systems , pp.269–278, 2020. 19 Chinese Journal of Electronics, vol.35, no.5, pp.1-24, https://doi.org/10.23919/cje.2025.00.438 

[69] J. Ma, Z. Zhao, X. Yi, J. Chen, et al. , “Modeling task relationships in multi-task learning with multi-gate mixture-of-experts”, in Proceed-ings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowl-edge discovery & data mining , pp.1930–1939, 2018. [70] C. Riquelme, J. Puigcerver, B. Mustafa, M. Neumann, et al. , “Scaling vision with sparse mixture of experts”, Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , vol.34, pp.8583–8595, 2021. [71] Z. Zeng, Y. Miao, H. Gao, H. Zhang, and Z. Deng, “Adamoe: Token-adaptive routing with null experts for mixture-of-experts language models”, in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: EMNLP , pp.6223–6235, 2024. [72] L. Jing, Y. Gao, Z. Wang, W. Lan, et al. , “Evomoe: Expert evolution in mixture of experts for multimodal large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23830 , in press, 2025. [73] G. Ilharco, M. T. Ribeiro, M. Wortsman, L. Schmidt, et al. , “Editing models with task arithmetic”, ICLR , in press, 2023. [74] M. Wortsman, G. Ilharco, S. Y. Gadre, R. Roelofs, et al. , “Model soups: Averaging weights of multiple fine-tuned models improves accuracy without increasing inference time”, in International confer-ence on machine learning , 2022. [75] G. Stoica, D. Bolya, J. B. Bjorner, P. Ramesh, et al. , “Zipit! merging models from different tasks without training”, in The Twelfth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [76] R. Entezari, H. Sedghi, O. Saukh, and B. Neyshabur, “The role of per-mutation invariance in linear mode connectivity of neural networks”, in Sparsity in Neural Networks-Advancing Understanding and Prac-tice: SNN Workshop 2021 , 2021. [77] J. Frankle, G. K. Dziugaite, D. Roy, and M. Carbin, “Linear mode connectivity and the lottery ticket hypothesis”, in International Con-ference on Machine Learning , 2020. [78] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, et al. , “Language models are few-shot learners”, Advances in neural information processing systems , vol.33, pp.1877–1901, 2020. [79] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, et al. , “Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , in press, 2023. [80] Y. Bengio, J. Louradour, R. Collobert, and J. Weston, “Curriculum learning”, in Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning , pp.41–48, 2009. [81] X. Wang, Y. Chen, and W. Zhu, “A survey on curriculum learn-ing”, IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence ,vol.44, no.9, pp.4555–4576, 2021. [82] L. Xiao, X. Yang, F. Peng, M. Yan, et al. , “Clip-vg: Self-paced cur-riculum adapting of clip for visual grounding”, IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , vol.26, pp.4334–4347, 2023. [83] A. Katharopoulos and F. Fleuret, “Biased importance sampling for deep neural network training”, arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.00043 , in press, 2017. [84] A. H. Jiang, D. L.-K. Wong, G. Zhou, D. G. Andersen, et al. , “Ac-celerating deep learning by focusing on the biggest losers”, arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00762 , in press, 2019. [85] A. Katharopoulos and F. Fleuret, “Not all samples are created equal: Deep learning with importance sampling”, in International confer-ence on machine learning , PMLR, pp.2525–2534, 2018. [86] D. Sow, H. Woisetschl¨ ager, S. K. Bulusu, S. Wang, et al. , “Dynamic loss-based sample reweighting for improved large language model pretraining”, in International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2025. [87] T. Wang, J.-Y. Zhu, A. Torralba, and A. A. Efros, “Dataset distilla-tion”, arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.10959 , in press, 2018. [88] R. Yu, S. Liu, and X. Wang, “Dataset distillation: A comprehensive review”, IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelli-gence , vol.46, no.1, pp.150–170, 2023. [89] Z. Deng and O. Russakovsky, “Remember the past: Distilling datasets into addressable memories for neural networks”, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol.35, pp.34391–34404, 2022. [90] L. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Lei, S. Mukherjee, et al. , “Accelerating dataset distillation via model augmentation”, in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp.11950–11959, 2023. [91] G. Cazenavette, T. Wang, A. Torralba, A. A. Efros, and J.-Y. Zhu, “Dataset distillation by matching training trajectories”, in Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp.4750–4759, 2022. [92] G. Li, R. Togo, T. Ogawa, and M. Haseyama, “Dataset distillation using parameter pruning”, IEICE Transactions on Fundamentals of Electronics, Communications and Computer Sciences , vol.107, no.6, pp.936–940, 2024. [93] B. Zhao and H. Bilen, “Dataset condensation with distribution match-ing”, in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Appli-cations of Computer Vision , pp.6514–6523, 2023. [94] K. Wang, B. Zhao, X. Peng, Z. Zhu, et al. , “Cafe: Learning to con-dense dataset by aligning features”, in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp.12196– 12205, 2022. [95] S. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Liu, C. Sun, et al. , “Dataset distillation with neu-ral characteristic function: A minmax perspective”, in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp.25570– 25580, 2025. [96] M. Paul, S. Ganguli, and G. K. Dziugaite, “Deep learning on a data diet: Finding important examples early in training”, Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , vol.34, pp.20596–20607, 2021. [97] M. Toneva, A. Sordoni, R. T. des Combes, A. Trischler, et al. , “An empirical study of example forgetting during deep neural network learning”, in International Conference on Learning Representations ,2019. [98] M. He, S. Yang, T. Huang, and B. Zhao, “Large-scale dataset pruning with dynamic uncertainty”, in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp.7713–7722, 2024. [99] X. Zhang, J. Du, Y. Li, W. Xie, and J. T. Zhou, “Spanning training progress: Temporal dual-depth scoring (tdds) for enhanced dataset pruning”, in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp.26223–26232, 2024. [100] S. Agarwal, H. Arora, S. Anand, and C. Arora, “Contextual diversity for active learning”, in European Conference on Computer Vision ,Springer, pp.137–153, 2020. [101] M. Welling, “Herding dynamical weights to learn”, in Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning ,pp.1121–1128, 2009. [102] B. Sorscher, R. Geirhos, S. Shekhar, S. Ganguli, and A. Morcos, “Be-yond neural scaling laws: Beating power law scaling via data prun-ing”, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol.35, pp.19523–19536, 2022. [103] X. Xia, J. Liu, J. Yu, X. Shen, et al. , “Moderate coreset: A universal method of data selection for real-world data-efficient deep learning”, in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2022. [104] A. Maharana, P. Yadav, and M. Bansal, “D2 pruning: Message pass-ing for balancing diversity and difficulty in data pruning”, in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [105] P. Micikevicius, S. Narang, J. Alben, G. Diamos, et al. , “Mixed pre-cision training”, in International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2018. A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design 20 

[106] X. L. Li and P. Liang, “Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation”, in Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp.4582–4597, 2021. [107] J. He, C. Zhou, X. Ma, T. Berg-Kirkpatrick, and G. Neubig, “Towards a unified view of parameter-efficient transfer learning”, in Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [108] C. Wei, Y. Shu, Y. T. He, and F. R. Yu, “Flexora: Flexible low rank adaptation for large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10774 , in press, 2024. [109] X. Liu, K. Ji, Y. Fu, W. Tam, et al. , “P-tuning: Prompt tuning can be comparable to fine-tuning across scales and tasks”, in Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pp.61–68, 2022. [110] C. Fu, H. Huang, X. Chen, Y. Tian, and J. Zhao, “Learn-to-share: A hardware-friendly transfer learning framework exploiting computa-tion and parameter sharing”, in International Conference on Machine Learning , PMLR, pp.3469–3479, 2021. [111] J. Pfeiffer, A. Kamath, A. R¨ uckl´ e, K. Cho, and I. Gurevych, “Adapter-fusion: Non-destructive task composition for transfer learning”, in 

Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume , pp.487– 503, 2021. [112] Y. Wang, S. Agarwal, S. Mukherjee, X. Liu, et al. , “Adamix: Mixture-of-adaptations for parameter-efficient model tuning”, in Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp.5744–5760, 2022. [113] S. He, R.-Z. Fan, L. Ding, L. Shen, et al. , “Mera: Merging pretrained adapters for few-shot learning”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.15982 , in press, 2023. [114] N. Lawton, A. Kumar, G. Thattai, A. Galstyan, and G. Ver Steeg, “Neural architecture search for parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large pre-trained language models”, in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pp.8506–8515, 2023. [115] H. Zhou, X. Wan, I. Vuli´ c, and A. Korhonen, “Autopeft: Automatic configuration search for parameter-efficient fine-tuning”, Transac-tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , vol.12, pp.525–542, 2024. [116] S. He, L. Ding, D. Dong, J. Zhang, and D. Tao, “Sparseadapter: An easy approach for improving the parameter-efficiency of adapters”, in 

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 , pp.2184–2190, 2022. [117] L. Zhang, A. Rao, and M. Agrawala, “Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models”, in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF in-ternational conference on computer vision , pp.3836–3847, 2023. [118] M. Tao, B.-K. Bao, H. Tang, and C. Xu, “Galip: Generative ad-versarial clips for text-to-image synthesis”, in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pp.14214–14223, 2023. [119] H. Zhou, X. Lu, W. Xu, C. Zhu, et al. , “Lora-drop: Efficient lora parameter pruning based on output evaluation”, in Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pp.5530–5543, 2025. [120] H. U. K. Shinwari and M. Usama, “Ard-lora: Dynamic rank allo-cation for parameter-efficient fine-tuning of foundation models with heterogeneous adaptation needs”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18267 ,in press, 2025. [121] H. Lu, C. Zhao, J. Xue, L. Yao, et al. , “Adaptive rank, re-duced forgetting: Knowledge retention in continual learning vision-language models with dynamic rank-selective lora”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.01004 , in press, 2024. [122] L. Xiao, X. Yang, F. Peng, Y. Wang, and C. Xu, “Hivg: Hierarchical multimodal fine-grained modulation for visual grounding”, in Pro-ceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia ,pp.5460–5469, 2024. [123] S. Chen, W. Wang, X. Chen, P. Lu, et al. , “Llama-lora neural prompt engineering: A deep tuning framework for automatically generating chinese text logical reasoning thinking chains”, Data Intelligence ,vol.6, no.2, pp.375–408, 2024. [124] T. Wolf, L. Debut, V. Sanh, J. Chaumond, et al. , “Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing”, in Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , Association for Computational Linguistics, Online, pp.38–45, https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/ 2020.emnlp-demos.6 , 2020. [125] S. Mangrulkar, S. Gugger, L. Debut, Y. Belkada, et al. , “PEFT: State-of-the-art parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods”, https: //github.com/huggingface/peft , 2022. [126] L. Zheng, W.-L. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, et al. , “Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena”, 2023, 2306.05685 .[127] M. H. Daniel Han and U. team, “Unsloth”, 2023, http:// github.com/unslothai/unsloth .[128] S. Li, H. Liu, Z. Bian, J. Fang, et al. , “Colossal-ai: A uni-fied deep learning system for large-scale parallel training”, in Proceedings of the 52nd International Conference on Par-allel Processing , Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, ICPP ’23, artilce no.766–775, doi:10.1145/ 3605573.3605613, https://doi.org/10.1145/3605573. 3605613 , 2023, ISBN 9798400708435. [129] R. Wang, Z. Gao, L. Zhang, S. Yue, and Z. Gao, “Empowering large language models to edge intelligence: A survey of edge effi-cient llms and techniques”, Computer Science Review , vol.57, artilce no.100755, 2025. [130] J. Yuan, H. Li, X. Ding, W. Xie, et al. , “Give me fp32 or give me death? challenges and solutions for reproducible reasoning”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09501 , in press, 2025. [131] M. Van Baalen, A. Kuzmin, S. S. Nair, Y. Ren, et al. , “Fp8 versus int8 for efficient deep learning inference”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17951 , in press, 2023. [132] H. Peng, K. Wu, Y. Wei, G. Zhao, et al. , “Fp8-lm: Training fp8 large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18313 , in press, 2023. [133] T. Dettmers, M. Lewis, Y. Belkada, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Gpt3. int8 (): 8-bit matrix multiplication for transformers at scale”, Advances in neural information processing systems , vol.35, pp.30318–30332, 2022. [134] P. Zhang, J. Wei, J. Zhang, J. Zhu, and J. Chen, “Accurate int8 training through dynamic block-level fallback”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08040 , in press, 2025. [135] W. Guo, D. Liu, W. Xie, Y. Li, et al. , “Towards accurate and effi-cient sub-8-bit integer training”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10948 , in press, 2024. [136] Y. Xu, X. Han, Z. Yang, S. Wang, et al. , “Onebit: Towards extremely low-bit large language models”, Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , vol.37, pp.66357–66382, 2024. [137] H. Wang, S. Ma, L. Dong, S. Huang, et al. , “Bitnet: Scal-ing 1-bit transformers for large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11453 , in press, 2023. [138] Z. Liu, C. Zhao, H. Huang, S. Chen, et al. , “Paretoq: Improving scal-ing laws in extremely low-bit llm quantization”, in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , . [139] C. Zeng, S. Liu, Y. Xie, H. Liu, et al. , “Abq-llm: Arbitrary-bit quantized inference acceleration for large language models”, in Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol.39, pp.22299–22307, 2025. 21 Chinese Journal of Electronics, vol.35, no.5, pp.1-24, https://doi.org/10.23919/cje.2025.00.438 

[140] Y. Liu, J. Ning, S. Xia, X. Gao, et al. , “Pruning large language models by identifying and preserving functional networks”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05239 , in press, 2025. [141] B. Hou, Q. Chen, J. Wang, G. Yin, et al. , “Instruction-following prun-ing for large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.02086 , in press, 2025. [142] J. Whitmore, C. Hastings, A. Patel, and S. Brody, “Efficient infer-ence of large language models through model compression”, in press, 2025. [143] Y. Liu, H. Yang, Y. Chen, R. Zhang, et al. , “Pat: Pruning-aware tuning for large language models”, in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2025. [144] M. Sun, Z. Liu, A. Bair, and J. Z. Kolter, “A simple and effec-tive pruning approach for large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11695 , in press, 2023. [145] S. Ashkboos, M. L. Croci, M. G. d. Nascimento, T. Hoefler, and J. Hensman, “Slicegpt: Compress large language models by deleting rows and columns”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15024 , in press, 2024. [146] Y. Li, L. Niu, X. Zhang, K. Liu, et al. , “E-sparse: Boosting the large language model inference through entropy-based n: M spar-sity”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15929 , in press, 2023. [147] C. Yang, Y. Zhu, W. Lu, Y. Wang, et al. , “Survey on knowledge dis-tillation for large language models: Methods, evaluation, and appli-cation”, ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , in press, 2024. [148] X. Xu, M. Li, C. Tao, T. Shen, et al. , “A survey on knowledge distil-lation of large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13116 ,in press, 2024. [149] M. Takrouri, N. M. Cuadrado, and M. Tak´ aˇ c, “Knowledge distillation from large language models for household energy modeling”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03034 , in press, 2025. [150] A. Mitra, L. Del Corro, S. Mahajan, A. Codas, et al. , “Orca 2: Teaching small language models how to reason”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11045 , in press, 2023. [151] C. He, Y. Ding, J. Guo, R. Gong, et al. , “Da-kd: Difficulty-aware knowledge distillation for efficient large language models”, in Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , . [152] L. H. Li, J. Hessel, Y. Yu, X. Ren, et al. , “Symbolic chain-of-thought distillation: Small models can also” think” step-by-step”, in The 61st Annual Meeting Of The Association For Computational Linguistics ,2023. [153] X. Luo, Y. Wang, Q. Zhu, Z. Zhang, et al. , “Turning trash into trea-sure: Accelerating inference of large language models with token re-cycling”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08696 , in press, 2024. [154] J. Sen, S. Dasgupta, and H. Waghela, “Confidence-modulated speculative decoding for large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15371 , in press, 2025. [155] Y. Cheng, A. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Recurrent drafter for fast speculative decoding in large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09919 , in press, 2024. [156] Y. Ni, C. Liu, Y. Tang, K. Han, and Y. Wang, “Ems-sd: Efficient multi-sample speculative decoding for accelerating large language mod-els”, in Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp.9307– 9320, 2025. [157] S. A. Budennyy, V. D. Lazarev, N. N. Zakharenko, A. N. Korovin, 

et al. , “Eco2ai: Carbon emissions tracking of machine learning mod-els as the first step towards sustainable ai”, in Doklady mathematics ,Springer, vol.106, pp.S118–S128, 2022. [158] E. Strubell, A. Ganesh, and A. McCallum, “Energy and policy con-siderations for modern deep learning research”, in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol.34, 2020. [159] Y.-H. Chen, T. Krishna, J. S. Emer, and V. Sze, “Eyeriss: An energy-efficient reconfigurable accelerator for deep convolutional neural net-works”, IEEE journal of solid-state circuits , vol.52, no.1, pp.127– 138, 2016. [160] G. Team, R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, J.-B. Alayrac, et al. , “Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805 , in press, 2023. [161] J. Wu and D. Ren, “Development of artificial intelligence chips in china”, Strategic Study of Chinese Academy of Engineering , vol.27, no.1, pp.133–141, 2025. [162] B. Wu, Y. Zhong, Z. Zhang, S. Liu, et al. , “Fast distributed inference serving for large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05920 , in press, 2023. [163] Y. Liu, J. Fu, S. Liu, Y. Zou, et al. , “Kv cache compression for infer-ence efficiency in llms: A review”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06297 ,in press, 2025. [164] H. Li, Y. Li, A. Tian, T. Tang, et al. , “A survey on large language model acceleration based on kv cache management”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19442 , in press, 2024. [165] Y. Liu, H. Li, Y. Cheng, S. Ray, et al. , “Cachegen: Kv cache compres-sion and streaming for fast large language model serving”, in Pro-ceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference , 2024. [166] S. Ge, Y. Zhang, L. Liu, M. Zhang, et al. , “Model tells you what to discard: Adaptive kv cache compression for llms”, in 12th Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024 , 2024. [167] G. WEI, X. Zhou, P. Sun, T. Zhang, and Y. Wen, “Rethinking key-value cache compression techniques for large language model serv-ing”, in Eighth Conference on Machine Learning and Systems , . [168] M. Davies, N. Crago, K. Sankaralingam, and C. Kozyrakis, “Effi-cient llm inference: Bandwidth, compute, synchronization, and ca-pacity are all you need”, arXiv preprint , in press, 2025. [169] Z. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, et al. , “Accelerating mixture-of-experts inference by hiding offloading latency with speculative de-coding”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.21706 , in press, 2025. [170] X. Zhuge, X. Shen, Z. Wang, F. Dang, et al. , “Specoffload: Unlock-ing latent gpu capacity for llm inference on resource-constrained de-vices”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10259 , in press, 2025. [171] R. Miao, Y. Yan, X. Yao, and T. Yang, “An efficient inference framework for early-exit large language models”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.20272 , in press, 2024. [172] D. J. Bajpai and M. K. Hanawal, “Free: Fast and robust vision lan-guage models with early exits”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06884 , in press, 2025. [173] B. Zheng, M. Ma, Z. Lin, and T. Yang, “A hybrid early-exit algo-rithm for large language models based on space alignment decoding (spade)”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.17618 , in press, 2025. [174] A. R. Bambhaniya, H. Wu, S. Subramanian, S. Srinivasan, et al. , “Un-derstanding and optimizing multi-stage ai inference pipelines”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09775 , in press, 2025. [175] Y. Yao, H. Jin, A. D. Shah, S. Han, et al. , “Scalellm: A resource-frugal llm serving framework by optimizing end-to-end efficiency”, in Pro-ceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pp.279–289, 2024. [176] C. Tian, X. Qin, K. Tam, L. Li, et al. , “Clone: Customizing llms for efficient latency-aware inference at the edge”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02847 , in press, 2025. [177] Y. Wu, S. Tang, C. Yu, B. Yang, et al. , “Task scheduling in geo-distributed computing: A survey”, IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems , in press, 2025. [178] J. Stojkovic, C. Zhang, ´ I. Goiri, J. Torrellas, and E. Choukse, “Dy-namollm: Designing llm inference clusters for performance and en-A Survey on the Green Development of Large Models: From Resource-Efficient Architectures to Hardware-Software Co-Design 22 

ergy efficiency”, in 2025 IEEE International Symposium on High Per-formance Computer Architecture (HPCA) , IEEE, 2025. [179] I. T. Kurniawan and B. R. Trilaksono, “Clusterfusion: Leveraging radar spatial features for radar-camera 3d object detection in au-tonomous vehicles”, IEEE Access , vol.11, pp.121511–121528, 2023. [180] K. Hong, G. Dai, J. Xu, Q. Mao, et al. , “Flashdecoding++: Faster large language model inference with asynchronization, flat gemm op-timization, and heuristics”, Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , vol.6, pp.148–161, 2024. [181] W. Wan, R. Kubendran, C. Schaefer, S. B. Eryilmaz, et al. , “A compute-in-memory chip based on resistive random-access mem-ory”, Nature , vol.608, no.7923, pp.504–512, 2022. [182] M. Davies, “Lessons from loihi: Progress in neuromorphic comput-ing”, in 2021 Symposium on VLSI Circuits , IEEE, pp.1–2, 2021. [183] B. J. Shastri, A. N. Tait, T. Ferreira de Lima, W. H. Pernice, et al. ,“Photonics for artificial intelligence and neuromorphic computing”, 

Nature Photonics , vol.15, no.2, pp.102–114, 2021. [184] Y. Sun, H. Ochiai, and H. Esaki, “Decentralized deep learning for multi-access edge computing: A survey on communication efficiency and trustworthiness”, IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence ,vol.3, no.6, pp.963–972, 2021. [185] D. Guo, D. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Song, et al. , “Deepseek-r1: Incentiviz-ing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , in press, 2025. [186] O. O. Oyewole and J. F. Joseph, “Sustainable ai and green comput-ing: Reducing the environmental impact of large-scale models with energy-efficient techniques”, International Journal of Scientific Re-search in Network Security and Communication , vol.13, no.3, pp.19– 26, 2025. [187] C. Elsworth, K. Huang, D. Patterson, I. Schneider, et al. , “Measur-ing the environmental impact of delivering ai at google scale”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15734 , in press, 2025. [188] C.-J. Wu, R. Raghavendra, U. Gupta, B. Acun, et al. , “Sustainable ai: Environmental implications, challenges and opportunities”, Proceed-ings of machine learning and systems , vol.4, pp.795–813, 2022. [189] G. Gupta, A. Tomar, S. Pamulaparthyvenkata, and A. Balakrishnan, “A comprehensive review of machine learning techniques for smart grid optimization”, Secure Energy Optimization: Leveraging Internet of Things and Artificial Intelligence for Enhanced Efficiency , in press, pp.29–60, 2025. [190] D. Rolnick, P. L. Donti, L. H. Kaack, K. Kochanski, et al. , “Tack-ling climate change with machine learning”, ACM Computing Sur-veys (CSUR) , vol.55, no.2, pp.1–96, 2022. [191] Y. Li, D. Choi, J. Chung, N. Kushman, et al. , “Competition-level code generation with alphacode”, Science , vol.378, no.6624, pp.1092– 1097, 2022. [192] L. Solovyeva, S. Weidmann, and F. Castor, “Ai-powered, but power-hungry? energy efficiency of llm-generated code”, in 2025 IEEE/ACM Second International Conference on AI Foundation Mod-els and Software Engineering (Forge) , IEEE, pp.49–60, 2025. [193] P. Deng, J. Zhang, X. Sheng, C. Yan, et al. , “Multi-granularity class prototype topology distillation for class-incremental source-free un-supervised domain adaptation”, in Proceedings of the Computer Vi-sion and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp.30566–30576, 2025. [194] Z. Yang, L. Li, J. Zhang, T. Wang, et al. , “Domain shared and specific prompt learning for incremental monocular depth estimation”, in Pro-ceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia ,pp.8306–8315, 2024. [195] J. Yin, L. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Gao, et al. , “Progressive homeostatic and plastic prompt tuning for audio-visual multi-task incremental learn-ing”, in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pp.2022–2033, 2025. [196] X. Tao, X. Hong, X. Chang, S. Dong, et al. , “Few-shot class-incremental learning”, in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp.12183–12192, 2020. [197] J. Gidlund, “Green ai: Reducing the carbon footprint of automated testing”, 2025.