Title: Generating Chain-of-Thoughts with a Pairwise-Comparison Approach to Searching for the Most Promising Intermediate Thought

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=CpcaL75UgY

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Generating Chain-of-Thoughts with a Pairwise-Comparison Approach to Searching for the Most Promising Intermediate Thought 

Zhen-Yu Zhang 1 Siwei Han 2 Huaxiu Yao 2 Gang Niu 1 Masashi Sugiyama 1 3 

# Abstract 

To improve the ability of the large language model (LLMs) to tackle complex reasoning prob-lems, chain-of-thoughts (CoT) methods were pro-posed to guide LLMs to reason step-by-step, en-abling problem solving from simple to complex. State-of-the-art methods for generating such a chain involve interactive collaboration, where the learner generates candidate intermediate thoughts, evaluated by the LLM, guiding the generation of subsequent thoughts. However, a widespread yet understudied problem is that the evaluation from the LLM is typically noisy and unreliable ,potentially misleading the generation process in selecting promising intermediate thoughts. In this paper, motivated by Vapnik’s principle, we use 

pairwise-comparison evaluation instead of point-wise scoring to search for promising intermediate thoughts with the noisy feedback from the LLM. In each round, we randomly pair intermediate thoughts and directly prompt the LLM to select the more promising one from each pair, allowing us to identify the most promising thoughts through an iterative process. To further alleviate the noise in the comparison, we incorporate techniques from ensemble learning and dueling bandits, propos-ing two variants of the algorithm. Experiments on three real-world tasks demonstrate the effec-tiveness of our proposed algorithm and verify the rationale of the pairwise comparison mechanism. 

# 1. Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs), such as the GPT (Brown et al., 2020) and PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2023), have re-      

> 1Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, RIKEN 2University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 3Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo. Correspondence to: Masashi Sugiyama <sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp >.
> Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine Learning , Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by the author(s).

cently demonstrated remarkable capabilities in a variety of real-world tasks. However, current LLMs still face limi-tations when dealing with complex tasks, especially those involving multi-step reasoning, such as mathematical or rea-soning problems (Rae et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022). To deal with such implicit complexity, chain-of-thoughts (CoT) approaches were proposed (Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2023). These approaches were proposed to use an incorporation of intermediate steps of reasoning (intermediate “thought”), enabling the LLM to reason pro-gressively, first generating intermediate solutions for simpler problems to incrementally improve its capacity to handle complicated tasks. Therefore, the key challenge is to design an effective CoT generation algorithm that guides the LLM towards desired solutions through step-by-step reasoning. There is a fruitful line of work that considers the CoT gen-eration problem. The pioneering work uses manual design prompts to let the LLM generate a CoT by itself (Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022). This line of research was recently extended by the score-based tree-of-thoughts (S-ToT) ap-proaches (Yao et al., 2023; Long, 2023), where the CoT generation is framed as an interactive process with the algo-rithm and the LLM. These approaches generate a set of can-didate intermediate thoughts each round and ask the LLM to score them and select the most promising ones. The next thoughts are then generated based on these selected ones, creating a tree-like data structure. A search algorithm, such as deep-first search, is used to identify the most promising CoT in the tree (see the detailed illustration in Figure 2). While these methods have shown remarkable empirical suc-cess, they rely on an accurate score evaluation of each in-termediate thought by the LLM. However, it is important to notice that: LLM scores are often noisy . For example, the LLM may give different responses to different prompts, even though these prompts convey the same meaning (Lu et al., 2022). The noisy nature of LLM feedback introduces new problems in the selection of the most promising inter-mediate thoughts and the subsequent generation of the tree structure. Therefore, it is crucial to make the CoT generation algorithms robust to the noisy feedback from LLMs. Several preliminary approaches have been proposed to miti-gate such noise in the LLM feedback, including estimating 1Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

uncertainty from the semantic aspect (Kuhn et al., 2022) or ensembling multiple thoughts (Wang et al., 2022). However, getting an accurate point-wise estimate for each intermediate thought could be resource-intensive, requiring the construc-tion of an additional model (Paul et al., 2024) or multiple queries (Wang et al., 2022): see also Figure 4 and Table 6 to 8 in our experiments. Fortunately, in the context of CoT generation, our focus is on identifying the most promising chain. Motivated by Vapnik’s principle (Vapnik, 1991), we do not need to solve a more general and difficult problem as an intermediate step, i.e. to estimate an accurate point-wise score for each intermediate thought. Instead, we can focus directly on identifying the most promising one in each round. However, it is still impractical to directly vote on all intermediate thoughts to identify the most promising one by LLMs due to the input length limit and the “lost in the middle” phenomenon (Liu et al., 2024). 

We argue that for LLMs, comparing two thoughts simulta-neously provides a more robust evaluation than assigning individual scores . We aim to leverage the comparison of two thoughts instead of evaluating a single thought in isolation, thereby providing a feasible alternative for identifying the most promising intermediate thought. This argument is well established in human cognition, as seen in mathematical problems, where it is often more feasible to approximate which thought is better by comparison than by considering and evaluating them separately. We also observe similar phenomena that LLMs to generate a more reliable evalu-ation in the experiments on the Sudoku task, as shown in Figure 1, where the LLM successfully identifies the better option given two intermediate solutions, but struggles to as-sign the correct value to intermediate thoughts individually. Based on the above insights, we propose a pairwise comparison-based algorithm for CoT generation to alleviate the noise in the LLM feedback and to find the most promis-ing intermediate thoughts each round. In each round, we randomly pair all the intermediate thoughts and directly ask the LLM to compare and select the more promising one from each pair, keeping the selected one and discarding the other. Then we repeat this procedure so that we get a small set of most promising intermediate thoughts, and subsequently, we generate the next thoughts based on these selected ones. This mechanism allows us to use a direct pairwise compari-son to identify the promising thoughts with a more robust evaluation. We also propose to include previous thoughts in the tree structure for comparison to mitigate the noisy nature of LLM’s feedback. Taking these two points into account, we frame the problem as an iterative process and propose a general CoT generation algorithm called comparison-based tree-of-thoughts (C-ToT). To further model the noise in the comparison, we resort to the techniques of ensemble and best-arm identification with dueling feedback (Falahatgar et al., 2017) and propose two variants of the proposed C-S-ToT Score: 2 p             

> 31
> 13
> 1
> 31
> 12
> 1
> S-ToT Score: 0 p
> 2
> 1
> 3
> S-ToT Score: 2 p
> 2
> 1
> 2
> S-ToT Score: 0 p
> 21
> 3
> 4
> 12
> S-ToT Score: 2 p
> 21
> 3
> 41
> 1
> S-ToT Score: 1 p
> Point -wise
> Evaluation
> Pair -wise
> Comparison
> Point -wise
> Evaluation
> Our Method’s
> Choice (C -ToT )

Figure 1: A demonstration of point-wise evaluation vs. pair-wise comparison based on real experimental results in Sudoku puzzles. The point-wise evaluation algorithm (S-ToT) assigns hard scores to each intermediate thought (the higher, the better), while our proposed algorithm (C-ToT) uses pair-wise comparison to obtain the more promising thoughts (green tick). In these cases, the LLM assigns incorrect scores , but it makes a correct comparison .

ToT algorithm. Through experiments on three real-world reasoning problems, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approaches and verify the rationale of the pairwise comparison mechanism. Our main contributions are: (1) We investigate the problem of noisy feedback in the CoT generation, which is widespread but understudied. (2) Motivated by Vapnik’s principle, we propose apairwise-comparison based approach for CoT genera-tion that exploits noisy feedback from the LLMs. (3) We proposed two variants of C-ToT that further account for different types of noise in the comparison feedback. 

# 2. Related Work 

CoT Generation. Generating appropriate CoT for LLMs to enhance their inference power is a critical problem in real-world applications. Previous work has explored task-specific training algorithms for identifying the CoT, includ-ing creating semantic graphs (Xu et al., 2021), refining the model through human-annotated CoT (Cobbe et al., 2021), or learning an additional extractor using heuristic-driven pseudo CoT (Chen et al., 2019). Different from these ap-proaches, the LLM-based CoT generation is used directly during inference, coupling the generation process with an LLM. In these approaches, the LLM guides the CoT gener-ation, eliminating the need for additional training. The pioneering work in LLM-based CoT generation intro-duces intermediate thoughts sequentially between the input query and LLM’s response. By simply prompting the LLM to “think step by step”, this strategy has been shown to signif-icantly improve several tasks over directly asking the LLM the original question, such as mathematical puzzles (Wei et al., 2022) or other general mathematical reasoning prob-lems (Drori et al., 2022). Due to the noisy nature of the LLM feedback, robustness can be improved by using an ensemble of different CoTs (Wang et al., 2022). To further improve the effectiveness of CoT generation, the score-based tree-of-thoughts generation algorithm was intro-2Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

duced independently by Yao et al. (2023) and Long (2023). They model the CoT generation process as a tree generation and search process. A single node in the tree represents an intermediate thought. Starting from a given node, the thought generator constructs a set of new nodes and the LLM generates scores for each node as an evaluation. Fi-nally, the timing of the tree expansion is determined by the search algorithm used (e.g., breadth-first or depth-first search). In addition, this search algorithm can also pro-vide capabilities including backtracking from unpromising thoughts. Further research extended the tree structure to a graph, such as the graph-of-thoughts (Besta et al., 2023), allowing the distillation of knowledge about entire network of thoughts. However, these methods cannot handle the noisy evaluation feedback caused by the LLM itself. 

Self-Reflection. Rather than interacting with LLMs to generate a step-by-step reasoning chain, self-reflection ap-proaches involve LLMs directly offering an initial thought chain to the query, followed by iterative refinement of the whole chain. Madaan et al. (2023) and Paul et al. (2024) introduced the “self-reflection” mechanism, using the LLMs to provide feedback to their generation candidates and then fine-tuning. Paul et al. (2024) updated the model to ex-plicitly generate intermediate thoughts while interacting with a critic model that provides automated feedback on the reasoning. These methods introduced new models to provide evaluation for the intermediate thoughts, but these critical models still do not always provide perfect evaluation. Furthermore, for complex problems that require sequential reasoning, such as the Game of 24, where the next thought should be generated and evaluated based on previous ones, the C-ToT generation could be more appropriate. 

Uncertainty Quantification in LLMs. This is a recent in-terest that aims to evaluate the confidence of a given answer by the LLM itself. Some work considered letting the LLM provide the confidence (Northcutt et al., 2021; Kadavath et al., 2022) by retraining the model. Another line of work considered designing entropy-based measures (Kuhn et al., 2022), or generating multiple outputs to obtain an uncer-tainty measure (Wang et al., 2022). Although they can be included in the CoT generation, they introduce a high com-putational cost during testing, particularly when obtaining an accurate score for each intermediate thought. 

# 3. Our Approach 

In this section, we first introduce the proposed comparison-based ToT generation algorithm, which is a general frame-work that generates CoT with a pairwise comparison mech-anism to find the most promising intermediate thought. To further alleviate the noise in LLM’s comparison feedback, we propose two different instantiations of our framework with theoretical analysis. 

3.1. CoT Generation via Pair-wise Comparison 

We first introduce the comparison-based ToT framework, where the key mechanism is the selection of the most promis-ing thoughts among all candidates in each round. We illustrate our proposed algorithm and compare it with previous approaches in Figure 2. The CoT approaches directly ask the LLM to generate a CoT. The S-ToT ap-proaches ask the LLM to score each intermediate thought and select the highest-scoring ones to generate the next layer. Different from these methods, we propose a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thoughts. Note that with LLMs, due to feed-back noise and input limitations, we cannot do a listwise voting that directly asks the LLM to sort all the interme-diate thoughts. Let Z be the set of all candidate interme-diate thoughts, and we want to select the most promising 

K thoughts from it. The comparison iterates as follows: we randomly pair thoughts from the set and select only the winner in each pair, thereby halving the size of Zi to |Zi|/2,where Zi denotes the set in the i-th iteration. After at most 

K × log 2 |Z| rounds, we can identify the K most promising intermediate thoughts by such direct comparison. In prac-tice, we can do one iteration of comparison and keep the remaining K thoughts in the last few rounds. For each pair, we compare thoughts a and b with the LLM by asking which one is better, using different prompts with n times, where 

n ≥ 1. We defer the implementation details to Section 4.1. We take previous unselected intermediate thoughts into comparison to explore possibly valuable but mis-evaluated thoughts caused by the noise in feedback. This is because the evaluation of intermediate thoughts may not always be accurate, and the generation of the tree structure may miss valuable intermediate thoughts in previous iterations. In the seminal research of S-ToT (Yao et al., 2023; Long, 2023; Besta et al., 2023), the thought generator uses a backtrack-ing mechanism to revisit previous thoughts when the current ones fall below a certain threshold. While this strategy aims to rescue promising thoughts, its efficiency is questionable because it may delay the exploration of previously valuable but incorrectly scored thoughts. In addition, backtracking only occurs after a thought has fallen below a manually chosen threshold, which is hard to know in advance. Motivated by these shortcomings and the efficiency of our pairwise-comparison mechanism, we maintain a repository of previous intermediate thoughts. At each round, we in-clude previously unselected thoughts in the comparisons, rather than relying on a fixed threshold. As illustrated in Fig-ure 2, during the pairwise comparison in the second layer, we include the intermediate thought that was not selected in the first layer. This mechanism ensures that the algorithm has the flexibility to revisit previous thoughts based on the comparison results from the LLM in each round. 3Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought Input Input Input       

> Output Output Output
> s=8 s=1 s=8
> s=7 s=2 s=8 s=2
> s=4 s=2
> s=3
> Chain -of -Thoughts Score -based Tree -of -Thoughts (S -ToT )

Comparison -based Tree -of -Thoughts (C -ToT )            

> Intermediate thoughts
> are scored by LLM
> Intermediate thoughts
> are compared by LLM round #1
> round #2
> round #3
> Pairwise -
> Comparison 1
> Pairwise -
> Comparison 2
> # 1 # 2 # 3
> # 4 # 5 # 6 # 7 # 8
> # 9 # 10

Figure 2: Schematic illustration of previous CoT and S-ToT approaches with our proposed C-ToT approach for CoT generation with LLMs. Each circle box represents an intermediate thought, which is a coherent sequence of language or equations that serves as an intermediate step in problem solving. In the S-ToT method, each intermediate thought is scored by the LLM (denoted by s in the figure), and the searching algorithm considers the highest-scoring ones as the most promising and then generates next intermediate thoughts based on them. In the C-ToT approach, we use pairwise comparison with the LLM in each round to find the most promising intermediate thoughts and then generate the next thoughts. Meanwhile, we include all previous intermediate thoughts in the comparison. 

We formulate the comparison-based ToT generation as an iterative interaction between the thought generation and the LLM. Take the C-ToT illustration in Figure 2 as an example. The algorithm starts by generating intermediate thoughts #1 to #3 based on the input. Following a pairwise comparison mechanism, thoughts #1 and #3 are selected, leading to the generation of new intermediate thoughts, namely #4 to #8. In the second layer, thought #2, thoughts #4 and #5 (linked to #1), along with thoughts #6 to #8 (linked to #3) are compared, subsequently resulting in the selection of thought #2 and thought #7 (linked to #3), and the generation of the next intermediate thoughts. Formally, we denote an intermediate thought by z. In round 

t, Zt represents the set of candidate intermediate thoughts for comparison, and bZt denotes the selected intermediate thoughts. In a sequence of T rounds, in the first round the algorithm generates a set of thoughts Z1 = {z1 

> i

}mi=1 

based on the query, where m denotes the set size. Then, the comparison-based ToT selects K most promising intermedi-ate thoughts based on the comparison result from the LLM. We denote the selected set of thoughts by bZ1 = {z1 

> j

}j∈[K].In the second round, the algorithm generates the new inter-mediate thoughts based on each selected thought 1. After 

T rounds, we can get K most promising thoughts, and all of them contain information about their parent nodes, thus formulating as K CoTs. Therefore, this iterative process facilitates the refinement and selection of thoughts over mul-tiple rounds. For each pair of thoughts, we use a direct comparison to identify the more promising one. We call such a direct comparison method “Standard Mode”. We 

> 1

Each newly generated intermediate thought will contain the information about all its parents 

Algorithm 1 C-ToT Algorithm 

1: Input: Query x, comparison times n, number of in-termediate thoughts generation m, number of selected thoughts K, depth of the tree T .

2: Generate initial thoughts Z1 of size m with query x

3: for t = 1 to T do 

4: if Standard Mode then 

5: Pair thoughts in Zt randomly 

6: while |Zt| > K do 

7: for every pair (a, b ) in Zt do 

8: Compare thoughts a and b by LLM n times, then take a majority vote. If a wins, keep thought a in Zt and drop b, and vice versa. 

9: end for 

10: end while 

11: Denote bZt by the remaining thoughts 

12: else 

13: Call Algorithm 2 to obtain bZt

14: end if 

15: Generate the next m thoughts for each thought in bZt.

16: end for 

summarize the proposed approach in Algorithm 1. 

Remark 1 (Comparison Complexity) . In our approach, we keep all previous intermediate thoughts to compare in each round. This may affect the operational efficiency and ex-ceed the storage limit. To improve the efficiency, we can introduce a counter for each intermediate thought to track its comparison frequency. If the comparison count of an inter-mediate thought exceeds a threshold, we can remove it from the tree. Since the comparison in each round is independent of each other, we could use parallel computing to improve 4Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

the efficiency of the algorithm, or exploit more efficient machine learning techniques to schedule computational re-sources more adaptively and efficiently (Zhou, 2024) in the future. If the tree depth is T , the total number of compar-isons required is less than the order of O(nT K log( m)) .

Remark 2 (Token Cost) . The token costs of our proposed C-ToT approach and the S-ToT approaches are task-specific and generally incomparable. The C-ToT approach could discover valuable but misevaluated previous intermediate thoughts earlier than the S-ToT method. However, it may in-troduce more token overhead as we compare these thoughts multiple times. Therefore, we are better suited to the prob-lem where the initial intermediate thoughts are more uncer-tain. We provide the token cost analysis in Appendix C.2 .

3.2. Instantiations and Analysis 

In the proposed C-ToT framework, we use a direct compari-son for each pair of thoughts. Although our C-ToT method explores two sample information compared to the S-ToT methods that use only single sample information, the com-parison feedback could still be inaccurate. We offer two methods to select the winning thought in a pair. 

Standard. Suppose the comparison difficulty of each pair is the same. Inspired by the ensemble algorithms in CoT generation (Wang et al., 2022), we can improve the robust-ness of the comparison feedback by setting n > 1 in the “Standard Mode”, so that we compare the two thoughts in each pair for n times and take majority voting output. 

Dueling. We consider a more general assumption of noisy comparisons, where we only assume an unknown ranking of the Mt thoughts at round t. This implies that the comparison difficulty of each pair varies, requiring a different number of comparisons for each pair. If two thoughts a and b are com-pared, thought a is chosen with some unknown probability 

p(a, b ) and b is chosen with p(b, a ) = 1 − p(a, b ), where the higher-ranked one has probability ≥ 1/2. Repeated comparisons are independent of each other. We formulate it as a best-arm identification problem with du-eling feedback (Yue et al., 2012; Falahatgar et al., 2017), pro-pose a dueling bandits instantiation of the C-ToT framework, and analyze its properties. For each pair, we keep the empir-ical probability bpa, a proxy for p(a, b ). We also maintain a confidence value bc s.t., w.h.p., bpa ∈ (p(a, b )−bc, p (a, b )+ bc).We stop the comparisons when it is sure of the winner or when it reaches its comparison budget n. If it reaches n com-parisons, it outputs the element with more wins, randomly breaking ties. During comparison, we also compare two ele-ments a, b with LLM by query them with different prompts. We summarize the proposed instantiation in Algorithm 2. Here stochasticity γ models the problem hardness. 

Analysis. First, we introduce some definitions. Given a set 

Algorithm 2 Knockout  

> 1:

Input: Set Z, bias ε, confidence δ, stochasticity γ,

i = 1  

> 2:

while |Z| > K do  

> 3:

Pair thoughts in Z randomly  

> 4:

for every pair (a, b ) do  

> 5:

Set bias ε = (2 1/3−1) εγ2i/ 3 , confidence δ = δ 

> 2i

, bpa =1/2, bc = 1 /2, n = 12ε2 log 2 

> ε

, r = 0 , wa = 0  

> 6:

while |bpa − 1/2| ≤ bc − ε and r ≤ n do  

> 7:

Compare thoughts a and b by LLM. if thought 

a wins, wa = wa + 1 , and vice versa.  

> 8:

r = r + 1 , bpa = wa 

> r

, bc =

q 12r log 4r2 

> δ
> 9:

if bpa ≤ 1/2 then  

> 10:

Keep thought b in Z and drop a, break.  

> 11:

else  

> 12:

Keep thought a in Z and drop b, break.  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end while  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

i = i + 1  

> 17:

end while  

> 18:

Return bZ by the remaining thoughts of thoughts Z = {z1, ..., zM } of size M . Suppose there is an unknown underlying ranking function r : Z 7 → N that ranks all the thoughts. Let r(z1), ..., r (zM ) be the ranking of the thoughts, such that when two elements za and zb

are compared, the higher ranked one is selected first, e.g. 

r(za) < r (zb). We define the ε-maximum via the (ε, δ )-PAC paradigm, which requires that the output is likely to be close to the intended value. Specifically, given ε > 0, δ > 0,with probability ≥ 1 − δ, the maximum selection must produce an element a such that for b, with r(b) = M ,

p(a, b ) ≥ 12 − ε. We call such an output ε-maximum. 

Lemma 1 (Theorem 3 in (Falahatgar et al., 2017)) .

Knockout (Z, ε, δ ) uses O( γ2|Z| 

> ε2

log 1 

> δ

) comparisons and with probability at least 1 − δ, outputs an ε-maximum. 

Proposition 1. Suppose that the depth of the tree is T , and thoughts in the shallower layers are more promising than those in the deeper ones. Then, the probability of missing the 

ε-maximum promising thoughts in the τ -th layer is 1 − δτ

with at most O( γ2 PTi=1 |Zi| 

> ε2

log 1 

> δ

) comparisons required for generating the whole tree of thoughts. 

Remark 3. Proposition 1 is directly derived from Lemma 1 by the union bound. Proposition 1 shows that, under the general assumption of noisy comparisons and utilizing our proposed pairwise-comparison approach, valuable interme-diate thoughts will still not be overlooked, especially for the thoughts in the shallow layer, which may be more uncertain as they appear at the beginning of the ToT generation. We leave the detailed proofs to Appendix B .5Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

# 4. Experiments 

We test our proposed algorithm in three real-world tasks: 

question answering (QA), as well as mathematical reasoning tasks, namely, the Game of 24 and Sudoku Puzzles. The LLM employed in experiments is GPT-3.5-turbo-1106. 

4.1. Experiment Setup Contenders Setup. Our evaluation firstly includes a com-parison with a baseline method that directly queries the LLM for the final result (we denote it as Direct); three state-of-the-art contenders: CoT (Wei et al., 2022), SC-CoT (Wang et al., 2022), and SToT (Yao et al., 2023). For the CoT method, we query the LLM directly to get the final answer, following the settings as in (Wei et al., 2022). For the SC-CoT method, for a fair comparison, if without further notice, we set the CoT number approximately the same number of tokens with our proposed algorithm. Specifically, 15 samples were gener-ated for each question, using the same settings as in (Wang et al., 2022), with the final answer determined by majority voting. The SToT approach is also implemented identically to the setting in Yao et al. (2023). For the depth of the tree in the SToT algorithm, we set it equal to the depth with our proposed algorithms C-ToT (Stand.) and C-ToT (Duel.). We further propose three contenders for comparison to test the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm. A robust im-plementation of SToT is proposed that follows the main idea of SC-CoT to account for noise in the LLM feedback, called SC-SToT. Two variants of SToT that equipped with our proposed mechanisms are also included, denoted as Comp-SToT, Back-SToT. Specifically, (1) SC-SToT: We denote the self-consistent variant of the ToT algorithm as SC-SToT, short for Self-Consistent ToT algorithm. To alleviate feedback noise in the ToT algorithm, we draw inspiration from the self-consistent CoT generation algorithm (Wang et al., 2022). Our proposal involves querying the LLM multiple times during intermediate thought evaluation in the ToT al-gorithm and using the majority voting results as the final evaluation in the SC-SToT. This contender is a direct extension of the ToT algorithm to account for the feedback noise of the LLM, but the cost is very high as it scores each intermediate thought multiple times; (2) Comp-SToT: We replace the score-based evaluation in the original SToT algorithm with our proposed pair-wise comparison approach and refer to this variant algorithm as Comp-SToT. (3) Back-SToT: We replace the search algorithm in the original SToT algorithm with our proposed mecha-nism, which retains all previous intermediate thoughts with their corresponding socres and takes the highest scoring thoughts as the most promising ones. We call this variant algorithm as Back-SToT. In addition, we include three state-of-the-art algorithms into comparison: PoT (Chen et al., 2023), Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023) and GoT (Besta et al., 2023). Detailed experi-mental results can be found in Appendix C.1 .For our proposed C-ToT approaches, we denote the C-ToT algorithm in “Standard Mode” by C-ToT (Stand.) and set the number of comparisons n to 1. We denote the C-ToT algorithm that considers the general comparison noise by C-ToT (Duel.), and set the maximum number of comparisons to 3 and set γ = 0 .1. All experiments are repeated 3 times. 

Intermediate Thoughts Generation. In general, different tasks should have different thought generators. Exploiting problem properties is essential to effectively design the in-termediate thoughts. We follow the setting of (Yao et al., 2023) to generate the intermediate thoughts. For example, we generate the thoughts as a few words, as in QA; as a line of equations, as in the Game of 24; or as an intermediate solution in the Sudoku puzzle. We defer the implementation for prompts and the cost comparison of our approaches and other contenders to Appendix A and Appendix C.2 .

4.2. Question Answering Task Setup. We first test the performance of our proposed algorithm on the question answering tasks using the AQuA dataset (Ling et al., 2017), which comprises 254 arithmetic reasoning tasks aimed at assessing logical abilities through various mathematical computation problems. Each ques-tion in this dataset is accompanied by five multiple-choice options, labeled from A to E. We follow the experimental protocol as it is in the work of Wang et al. (2022). The accu-racy of the responses is gauged by comparing the generated answers with the standard solutions. Results on other QA datasets can be found in Appendix C.1 .

C-ToT Setup. For the AQuA dataset, we set the maximum depth of tree of thoughts to 3. For each intermediate thought selected, we set m = 12 , thus generating 12 new interme-diate thoughts as the next step. The maximum number of selected thoughts K per layer is set to 3. Therefore, starting from the “question” as the root, all newly generated thoughts are compared, and we select 3 most promising intermediate thoughts to generate the next step. In the question answering task, it is difficult to set a fixed length for the C-ToT, i.e., an intermediate thought may already summarize the answer before reaching the maxi-mum length of the C-ToT. For those selected intermediate thoughts that have already reached an answer, we add them to the “answer list” and do not include them in the com-parison in the next round. For those intermediate thoughts that have already reached an answer but were not selected, we will include them in the comparison in the next round. This mechanism thus gives excluded answers a chance to 6Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought           

> Method Accuracy Direct 24.8% CoT 42.3% SC-CoT 58.4% SToT 57.1% SC-SToT 57.6% Comp-SToT 59.0% Back-SToT 58.0% C-ToT (Stand.) 61.4 %C-ToT (Duel.) 63.0 %

Table 1: Average ac-curacy on AQuA. Ours incorrect Ours correct   

> S-ToT correct S-ToT incorrect
> 18 127
> 80 29
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50

Figure 3: Predictions of SToT and Comp-SToT on AQuA. 

be included in the “answer list” by subsequent comparisons. After T rounds of thought generation and comparison for se-lection, the selected chains are appended to the “answer list”, and a majority voting mechanism is used on the “answer list” to determine the final answer. We leave the implementation details of the thought generator and the comparison prompt for the question answering task to Appendix A.1 .

Comparison Results. We report the comparison results of our proposed approaches with other contenders in Table 1. All CoT approaches outperform the Direct query method, showing the importance of designing effective CoTs to guide LLMs from simplicity to complexity. We can also observe that the SC-SToT method outperforms the original SToT method, where the algorithm scores the intermediate thoughts multiple times to alleviate the noise. However, this mechanism will significantly increase the token cost. We leave the detailed discussion of token cost to Appnedix C.2 .Both proposed variants of SToT methods achieve higher average accuracy than the original SToT method. In Comp-SToT, the point-wise scoring mechanism is replaced by a pairwise comparison, while in Back-SToT, our backtracking search algorithm replaces the original search algorithm, tak-ing into account all previous intermediate thoughts. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of these two mecha-nisms, such that the proposed C-ToT (Stand.) and C-ToT (Duel.) approaches outperform all contenders. Moreover, C-ToT (Duel.) achieves superior performance by further modeling noise in the comparison. We delve deeper to explore the benefits of the pairwise comparison mechanism to test whether it can better find the most promising intermediate thoughts. Note that we do not have access to the underlying value or order of the intermediate thoughts in each round. Therefore, we use the final prediction error as a proxy, since the depth of the tree structure in the QA datasets is shallow, limited to 1 to 3 levels. We quantify the number of QA problems correct-ly/incorrectly predicted by ToT and Comp-SToT and report it in Figure 3. Our observation shows that Comp-SToT predicts more correctly when S-ToT predicts incorrectly, showing the superiority of the pairwise comparison mecha-nism over the pointwise scoring mechanism. This validates the rationale of pairwise comparison mechanism. Method Accuracy Direct 8.0% CoT 4.3% SC-CoT 8.0% SToT 34.3% SC-SToT 40.0% Comp-SToT 36.3% Back-SToT 39.0% C-ToT (Stand.) 40.0 %C-ToT (Duel.) 41.0 %

Table 2: Average ac-curacy on Game of 24. 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 

> Cost per question($)
> 32
> 34
> 36
> 38
> 40
> 42
> Accuracy(%)
> SToT
> SC-SToT
> Comp-SToT
> Back-SToT
> C-ToT (Stand.)
> C-ToT (Duel.)

Figure 4: Accuracy and token costs of differenta methods. 

4.3. Game of 24 Task setup. This is a math problem where the goal is to use four numbers and basic arithmetic operations {+, −, ∗, / } to get a sum of 24. For example, given the input {4, 9, 10 , 13 },a viable solution would be (10 − 4) ∗ (13 − 9) = 24 . In our experiments, we use the same dataset as in the work of Yao et al. (2023) and follow their experimental setup, which consists of 1,362 problems taken from the 24-point game on 4nums.com. We have selected questions numbered 401 to 500 as our question set. Each problem consisted of four numbers selected from 1 to 13, and the goal is to formulate a calculation using these numbers to reach a total of 24. The accuracy of the solutions is scored based on whether all 4 input numbers were used and whether the result is 24. 

C-ToT Setup. In this task, we restore unselected interme-diate thoughts in previous layers and apply pruning when the current node is inferior to previously unselected ones. We set the maximum depth of tree to 6. The computation terminates either when an answer containing the number 24 is derived, or when the maximum layer limit is reached. We set the number of selected intermediate thoughts per layer K = 5 and let the LLM generate a variable number of new thoughts. If the total number of new thoughts is less than or equal to twice the maximum number of selected thoughts, thoughts are moved from the “remain list” (a list that stores reserved thoughts) to the new node list until the number of new thoughts reaches twice the maximum number of selected thoughts or the “remain list” is emptied. We also optimize the pruning process that takes place before the comparison stage and apply it to all contenders to save tokens. Newly generated intermediate thoughts with a single number unequal to 24 is eliminated. The rest are then filtered by comparison, selecting a number of new thoughts equal to or less than the maximum number of selected thoughts. Thoughts that are not selected are added to the “remain list”. If one of the selected thoughts contains the final answer, it is added to the “answer list” and the interactive process is stopped. We leave the implementation details of the thought generator and the comparison prompt to Appendix A.2 .

Comparison Results. We report the overall comparison results in Table 2. We observed trends similar to those re-ported in the QA task. We find that both the SToT and 7Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

CToT approaches significantly outperform the CoT-based methods, indicating the need to interact with the LLM to generate a more powerful chain of thoughts to handle com-plex reasoning tasks. The SC-SToT method improves the performance of SToT, while the Comp-SToT can achieve a similar improvement with pairwise comparison, indicating the superiority of the comparison mechanism. Therefore, the combination of the comparison mechanism and the spe-cific design for comparison noise allows the C-ToT (Duel.) to achieve the highest average accuracy. We also report the average accuracy of different methods against their token cost in Figure 4. We can observe that the token cost per question of the Comp-SToT algorithm is the same as that of the SToT algorithm, but it achieves a better performance. In practice, we can reduce the token cost by using a counter for each thought to track its comparison frequency. If the comparison count of a thought exceeds a threshold, we can remove it from the tree. We also leave the detailed discussion of token cost to Appnedix C.2 .

4.4. Sudoku Puzzle Task Setup. We use the Sudoku Dataset (Long, 2023), containing 10 Sudoku puzzles each of 3x3, 4x4, and 5x5 dimensions. Each puzzle is partially filled with numbers, and the task is to complete the entire Sudoku grid without changing the given numbers. The correctness of the solu-tions was determined by whether a complete and correct Sudoku grid is generated. 

C-ToT Setup. In this task, we test our proposed algorithm against other competitors in Sudoku puzzles of three differ-ent sizes. In each case, we set the maximum depth of tree of thoughts to 15. The computation stops either when the correct Sudoku solution is derived or when the maximum number of steps is reached. For each intermediate thought selected, we set m = 5 , thus generating 5 new intermediate thoughts as the next step. The maximum number of selected thoughts K per layer is also set to 3. From the newly generated thoughts, a number equal to or less than the maximum allowed was selected by comparison. A pruning strategy was used to check for and eliminate thoughts containing results that did not meet the Sudoku requirements, such as duplicate numbers in the same row or column. These non-compliant results were removed from both the selected and unselected thoughts. The remaining unselected thoughts were then added to the “remain list”. If the number of selected thoughts was less than the maxi-mum, additional thoughts were moved from the “remain list” to the “select list” until either the maximum number was reached or the “remain list” was emptied. We then checked whether the “select list” contained a correct solution. If a correct solution was found, it was added to the “answer list” Method Acc. 3 × 3 Acc. 4 × 4 Acc. 5 × 5                            

> Direct 56.7% 37.7% 16.7% CoT 73.3% 36.7% 23.3% SC-CoT 76.7% 50.0% 16.7% SToT 86.7% 46.7% 46.7% SC-SToT 96.7% 53.3% 50.0% Comp-SToT 100.0% 46.7% 50.0% Back-SToT 100.0% 60.0% 56.7% C-ToT (Stand.) 100.0 %63.3 %60.0 %C-ToT (Duel.) 100.0 %63.3 %63.3 %
> Table 3: Average accuracy on Sudoku Puzzles.

and the program was terminated. We leave the implemen-tation details of the thought generator and the comparison prompt to Appendix A.3 .

Comparison Results. We report the comparison results in Table 3. In all three tasks, our proposed approaches, C-ToT (Stand.) and C-ToT (Duel.), consistently achieve the highest average accuracy, demonstrating their superior ability to han-dle complex reasoning tasks. While the SToT method gener-ally outperforms the Direct method and the CoT method, it does not always outperform the SC-ToT method, as seen in the 4 × 4 Sudoku task. This phenomenon may be due to the potential noise in pointwise scoring methods, which could mislead the subsequent generation of intermediate thoughts. The SC-ToT method introduces thought ensembles, which naturally mitigate the noise in the LLM feedback. Our pro-posed methods consistently outperform other contenders, suggesting that pairwise comparison mechanism effectively mitigates noise in LLM feedback, identifies the most promis-ing intermediate thoughts, and improves the generated chain compared to SToT-based methods. We can observe that the C-ToT (Stand.) algorithm achieves the same performance as the C-ToT (Duel.) algorithm, which indicates that a single pairwise comparison could already provide reliable feedback in the Sudoku puzzle tasks. 

# 5. Conclusion 

This paper investigates a widespread but understudied prob-lem of noisy feedback from LLMs in CoT generation tasks. Motivated by Vapnik’s principle, we argue that for LLMs, the simultaneous comparison of two thoughts provides a more robust evaluation compared to individual value eval-uations, and thus we propose a pairwise-comparison ToT approach C-ToT, approaching to searching for the most promising intermediate thought. The proposed method di-rectly selects the most promising intermediate thought by pairwise comparison, and incorporates previous thoughts into the comparison to allow for rethinking. To further allevi-ate the noise in the comparison, we propose two variants of the C-ToT algorithm, and analyze the theoretical properties. Experiments on three real-world mathematical and reason-ing tasks show the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm and verify the rationale of the pairwise comparison. 8Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

# Acknowledgments 

HY was supported by Cisco Faculty Research Award. MS was supported by JST CREST Grant Number JP-MJCR18A2. 

# Impact Statement 

This research investigates a general problem of CoT genera-tion with any LLM, where we take into account the noise in the feedback of the LLM. Therefore, when using LLMs for complex mathematical or logical reasoning problems, the user could benefit from our study from the aspect of gen-erating a more effective CoT. The consequences of system failure and bias in the data are not applicable. 

# References 

Besta, M., Blach, N., Kubicek, A., Gerstenberger, R., Gi-aninazzi, L., Gajda, J., Lehmann, T., Podstawski, M., Niewiadomski, H., Nyczyk, P., et al. Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09687 , 2023. Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al. Language models are few-shot learn-ers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 33:1877–1901, 2020. Chen, J., Lin, S.-t., and Durrett, G. Multi-hop ques-tion answering via reasoning chains. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.02610 , 2019. Chen, W., Ma, X., Wang, X., and Cohen, W. W. Program of thoughts prompting: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. Chowdhery, A., Narang, S., Devlin, J., Bosma, M., Mishra, G., Roberts, A., Barham, P., Chung, H. W., Sutton, C., Gehrmann, S., et al. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,24(240):1–113, 2023. Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H., Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J., Nakano, R., et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168 , 2021. Drori, I., Zhang, S., Shuttleworth, R., Tang, L., Lu, A., Ke, E., Liu, K., Chen, L., Tran, S., Cheng, N., et al. A neural network solves, explains, and generates university math problems by program synthesis and few-shot learning at human level. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 119(32):e2123433119, 2022. Falahatgar, M., Orlitsky, A., Pichapati, V., and Suresh, A. T. Maximum selection and ranking under noisy compar-isons. In Proceedings of the 34th International Con-ference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pp. 1088–1096, 2017. Kadavath, S., Conerly, T., Askell, A., Henighan, T., Drain, D., Perez, E., Schiefer, N., Dodds, Z. H., DasSarma, N., Tran-Johnson, E., et al. Language models (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221 , 2022. Kuhn, L., Gal, Y., and Farquhar, S. Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for uncertainty estimation in nat-ural language generation. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2022. Ling, W., Yogatama, D., Dyer, C., and Blunsom, P. Program induction by rationale generation: Learning to solve and explain algebraic word problems. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics (ACL) , pp. 158–167, 2017. Liu, N. F., Lin, K., Hewitt, J., Paranjape, A., Bevilacqua, M., Petroni, F., and Liang, P. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:157–173, 2024. Long, J. Large language model guided tree-of-thought. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08291 , 2023. Lu, Y., Bartolo, M., Moore, A., Riedel, S., and Stenetorp, P. Fantastically ordered prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. In Pro-ceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , pp. 8086–8098, 2022. Madaan, A., Tandon, N., Gupta, P., Hallinan, S., Gao, L., Wiegreffe, S., Alon, U., Dziri, N., Prabhumoye, S., Yang, Y., et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 36:pages to appear, 2023. Northcutt, C. G., Jiang, L., and Chuang, I. L. Confident learning: Estimating uncertainty in dataset labels. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 70:1373–1411, 2021. Paul, D., Ismayilzada, M., Peyrard, M., Borges, B., Bosse-lut, A., West, R., and Faltings, B. Refiner: Reasoning feedback on intermediate representations. In Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL) , pp. 1100–1126, 2024. 9Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

Rae, J. W., Borgeaud, S., Cai, T., Millican, K., Hoffmann, J., Song, F., Aslanides, J., Henderson, S., Ring, R., Young, S., et al. Scaling language models: Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446 , 2021. Srivastava, A., Rastogi, A., Rao, A., Shoeb, A. A. M., Abid, A., Fisch, A., Brown, A. R., Santoro, A., Gupta, A., Garriga-Alonso, A., et al. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research ,2023. Vapnik, V. Principles of risk minimization for learning the-ory. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,4, 1991. Wang, X., Wei, J., Schuurmans, D., Le, Q. V., Chi, E. H., Narang, S., Chowdhery, A., and Zhou, D. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in lan-guage models. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2022. Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 35: 24824–24837, 2022. Xu, W., Deng, Y., Zhang, H., Cai, D., and Lam, W. Ex-ploiting reasoning chains for multi-hop science question answering. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2021 , pp. 1143–1156, 2021. Yao, S., Yu, D., Zhao, J., Shafran, I., Griffiths, T. L., Cao, Y., and Narasimhan, K. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 36: 11809–11822, 2023. Yue, Y., Broder, J., Kleinberg, R., and Joachims, T. The k-armed dueling bandits problem. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 78(5):1538–1556, 2012. Zhou, Z.-H. Learnability with time-sharing computational resource concerns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02217 ,2024. 10 Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

# A. Implementation Details 

In this section, we provide implementation details for all experiments, focusing primarily on the design of the thought generation and comparison prompts for each task. 

A.1. Question Answering Thought Generator. We use a zero-shot prompt. For each question, we use the same prompt multiple times to generate a specified number of different new thoughts. 

Prompt = ’Here is a question. You should work on it step by step. Your answer must be only the alphabet of your choice and begin with ###. For example: ### A, which should be at the last line. Q: {question}’ 

Comparison Prompt. We use multiple different prompts to generate the comparison result at each round. For the QA problem, we use three different prompts. We evaluate the same thought three times by using each prompt once and take the majority as the answer. 

Prompt 1 = ’You should judge which of the two analysis is better. You must only reply 1 or 2. 1: {input_1} 2: {input_2}’ Prompt 2 = ’Find out which of the two analysis is better. You must only reply 1or 2. 1: {input_1} 2: {input_2}’ Prompt 3 = ’Compare the two analysis and find which is better. You must only reply 1 or 2. 1: {input_1} 2: {input_2}’ 

A.2. Game of 24 Thought Generator. In this experiment, we use prompts similar to the ToT experiment to generate thoughts. There are two prompts: one is to select two numbers from the remaining list for the next step in the 24-point calculation, and then to add the newly obtained number back into the remaining list of numbers. The other is to generate the total operation formula that results in 24, based on all previous steps, when only one number remains. Both prompts are few-shot. 

Prompt 1 = ’You should choose two of the input numbers and use basic arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to obtain a new number. The new number should replace those two input numbers. Give me at least 6 possible next steps. Input: 2 8 8 14 Possible next steps: 2 + 8 = 10 (left: 8 10 14) 8 / 2 = 4 (left: 4 8 14) 14 + 2 = 16 (left: 8 8 16) 2 * 8 = 16 (left: 8 14 16) 8 - 2 = 6 (left: 6 8 14) 14 - 8 = 6 (left: 2 6 8) 14 / 2 = 7 (left: 7 8 8) 14 - 2 = 12 (left: 8 8 12) Input: {input} Possible next steps:’ Prompt 2 = ’Use numbers and basic arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to obtain 24. Each step, you are only allowed to choose two of the remaining numbers to obtain a new number. 

11 Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

Input: 4 4 6 8Steps: 4 + 8 = 12 (left: 4 6 12) 6 - 4 = 2 (left: 2 12) 2 * 12 = 24 (left: 24) Answer: (6 - 4) * (4 + 8) = 24 Input: 2 9 10 12 Steps: 12 * 2 = 24 (left: 9 10 24) 10 - 9 = 1 (left: 1 24) 24 * 1 = 24 (left: 24) Answer: (12 * 2) * (10 - 9) = 24 Input: {input}’ 

Comparison Prompt. We use multiple different prompts to generate the comparison result at each round. For the 24 problem, we use three different prompts. All prompts are few-shot. We evaluate the same thought three times by using each prompt once and take the majority as the answer. 

Prompt 1 = ’I will give you two groups of numbers. The evaluation criteria is if using all of the given numbers with basic arithmetic operations (+ - * /) can reach 24. You should compare the two inputs and decide which input is better . You should only reply 1 or 2. input_1: 2 12 2 * 12 = 24 input_2: 11 12 all arithmetic operations can’t get 24 Answer: 1 input_1: 1 2 4too small input_2: 3 83 * 8 =24 Answer: 2 input_1: 1 12 11 1 + 12 + 11 = 24 input_2: 12 12 12 + 12 = 24 Both can reach 24, randomly select one Answer: 1 input_1: {input_1} input_2: {input_2} Answer: ’ Prompt 2 = ’I will give you two groups of numbers. Tell me which input is better. The better one is more possible to reach 24 by using all of the given numbers with basic arithmetic operations (+ - * /). You should only reply 1 or 2. //same examples input_1: {input_1} input_2: {input_2} Answer: ’ Prompt 3 = ’Here are two groups of numbers. Tell me which input is more possible to use all of the given numbers with basic arithmetic operations (+ - * /) to get 24. You should only reply 1 or 2. Don’t add any explanation. //same examples 

12 Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

input_1: {input_1} input_2: {input_2} Answer: ’ 

A.3. Sudoku Puzzle Thought Generator. We use the following prompt to generate thoughts. 

Prompt = ’This is a {puzzle_size}x{puzzle_size} two-dimensional array represents a matrix, where some numbers are already given, and ’*’ represents the numbers that need to be filled in. You should pick 1 or 2 ’*’ to fill in a number between 1 to {puzzle_size}. Don’t change the given number. Don’t complete the whole puzzle immediately until there is only 1 or 2 ’*’ left to be filled in. Your answer should just be the same format as the question below. When you answer, begin with ###. For example: ###[[1, *, *], [*, 1, *], [*, 2, *]] Question: {question}’ 

Comparison Prompt. We use multiple different prompts to generate the comparison result at each round. For the Sudoku problem, we use three different prompts. All prompts are zero-shot. 

Prompt 1 = ’You should judge which of the two two-dimensional array better represents a {puzzle_size}x{puzzle_size} Sudoku puzzle. ’*’ means the value is yet to be decided. You should judge by considering if in each row or column 1 to {puzzle_size} could appear and only appear once. You must only reply 1 or 2. 1:{input_1} 2:{input_2}’ Prompt 2 = ’Find which of the two two-dimensional array better represents a { puzzle_size}x{puzzle_size} Sudoku puzzle. ’*’ means the value hasn’t been decided. The better one should satisfy that in each row or column 1 to {puzzle_size} could appear and only appear once. You must only reply 1 or 2. 1:{input_1} 2:{input_2}’ Prompt 3 = ’Which of the two two-dimensional array better represents a { puzzle_size}x{puzzle_size} Sudoku puzzle? ’*’ means the value is yet to be decided. A better one means in each row or column 1 to {puzzle_size} could appear and only appear once. You must only reply 1 or 2. 1:{input_1} 2:{input_2}’ 

# B. Proofs 

We first introduce the following lemma before our main proof. 

Lemma 2 (Lemma 2 in (Falahatgar et al., 2017)) . Let ep(i, j ) = p(i, j ) − 1/2 be the additional probability by which i is preferable to j. Let z∗ be the maximum in Z and k∗ be the comparison winner. The comparison algorithm on set Z uses  

> |Z|
> 4ε2

log 2 

> δ

comparisons and with probability ≥ 1 − δ,

ep(z∗, k ∗) ≤ γε. 

Proof of Lemma 2. To make this paper self-contained, we provide the proofs in (Falahatgar et al., 2017) here. First, we prove that the probability of the direct pairwise comparison process providing a wrong winner is less than δ. Let bpri and bcr

13 Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

denote bpi and bc respectively after r number of comparisons. The output of the pairwise comparison will not be i only if 

bpri < 12 + ε − bcr for any r < m = 12ε2 log 2 

> δ

or if bpi < 12 for r = m.Considering the first case, after r comparisons, by Chernoff bound, 

Pr( bpri < 12 + ε − bcr ) ≤ e−2r(bcr )2

= e− log 4r2 

> δ

= δ

4r2 .

Using union bound, 

Pr( ∃r s.t. bpri ≤ 12 + ε − bcr ) ≤ δ

2 .

Considering the second case, after m = 12ε2 log 2 

> δ

rounds, by Chernoff bound, 

P r (bpmi < 12 ) ≤ e−2mε 2

= δ

2 . (1) Thus, the probability of each of these events happening is bounded by δ 

> 2

, and thus the probability of the pairwise comparison process providing a wrong winner is less than δ.As each of the |Z|/2 pairs is compared at most 12ε2 log 2 

> δ

times, the total comparisons is less than |Z| 

> 4ε2

log 2 

> δ

. Let k∗ be the comparison winner and z∗ be the maximum in Z. Let a be the element paired with z∗. There are two cases: ep(z∗, a ) ≥ ε

and ep(z∗, a ) < ε .If ep(z∗, a ) ≥ ε, by Eqn. (1) with probability ≥ 1 − δ, z∗ will win and hence by definitions of z∗ and k∗, ep(z∗, k ∗) = 0 ≤ γε .Alternatively, if ep(z∗, a ) < ε , let winner (i, j ) denote the winner between i and j when compared for 12ε2 log 1 

> δ

times. Then, 

r(a) (a)

≤ r(winner (z∗, a )) (b)

≤ r(k∗) (c)

≤ r(z∗)

where (a) follows from r(a) ≤ r(z∗), (b) and (c) follow from the definitions of z∗ and k∗ respectively. From strong stochastic tranisitivity on a, k∗ and z∗, ep(z∗, k ∗) ≤ γ ep(z∗, a ) ≤ γε .Now we begin to prove Lemma 1. 

Proof of Lemma 1. To make this paper self-contained, we also provide the proofs in (Falahatgar et al., 2017) here. We first show that with probability ≥ 1 − δ, the output of Knockout is an ε-maximum. Let εi = cε/ 2i/ 3 and δi = δ/ 2i. Note that εi

and δi are bias and confidence values used in round i. Let bi be a maximum element in the set Z before round i. Then by Lemma 2, with probability ≥ 1 − δi,

ep(bi, b i+1 ) ≤ cε 

2i/ 3 . (2) By union bound, denote by p′ the probability that Eqn. (2) does not hold for some round 1 ≤ i ≤ log |Z|, then we have 

p′ ≤ 

> log |Z|

X

> i=1

δi = 

> log |Z|

X

> i=1

δ

2i ≤ δ. 

With probability ≥ 1 − δ, Eqn. (2) holds for all i and by stochastic triangle inequality, 

ep(b1, b log |Z|+1 ) ≤ 

> log |Z|

X

> i=1

ep(bi, b i+1 ) ≤

> ∞

X

> i=1

cε 

2i/ 3 = ε. 

We now bound the number of comparisons. Let ni = |Z| 

> 2i−1

be the number of elements in the set at the beginning of round i.Denote by NC i the number of comparisons at round i, then we have NC i ≤ ni

2 · γ222i/ 3

2c2ε2 · log 2i+1 

δ .

14 Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

Hence the number of comparisons in all rounds is  

> log |Z|

X

> i=1

|Z|

2i · γ222i/ 3

2c2ε2 · log 2i+1 

δ ≤ |Z|γ2

2c2ε2

> ∞

X

> i=1

12i/ 3



i + log 2

δ



= |Z|γ2

2c2ε2

 21/3

c2 + 1

c log 2

δ



= O

 |Z|γ2

ε2 log 1

δ



.

Now we begin to prove Proposition 1. 

Proof of Proposition 1. In each round of comparison, according to Lemma 1, we have the probability of 1 − δ to output the ε-maximum thoughts. Suppose that the thoughts in the shallower layers are more promising than those in the deeper ones, which is often the case in step-by-step reasoning tasks. For example, r([ z1 

> j

]) ≥ r([ z1 

> i

, z2]) for j ∈ [K], i̸ ∈ [K], and 

z2 ∈ Z2. When generating the intermediate thoughts in the τ -th layer, the probability that the ε-maximum thoughts are not selected is 1 − δτ .Therefore, the probability of missing the ε-maximum promising thoughts in the τ -th layer is 1 − δτ with at most 

O

 γ2 PTi=1 |Zi| 

> ε2

log 1

> δ



comparisons required for generating the tree. 

# C. Additional Experimental Results 

C.1. Experimental Results Summary 

First, we present a summary of the experimental results. We introduce three additional QA datasets—Gsm8k (Cobbe et al., 2021), Coin Flip (OOD) (Wei et al., 2022), and BBH (Srivastava et al., 2023)—along with two more state-of-the-art algorithms for comparison, with implementation details provided below. 

Contenders. PoT (Chen et al., 2023): PoT requires in-context samples to guide LLMs generating Python code step-by-step, and the number of samples is a hyperparameter. Since SToT and C-ToT do not always require such samples, we choose appropriate number of samples in PoT to maintain experimental consistency with other methods. We use one in-context sample for all datasets expecting Game of 24, which uses 3 samples. Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023): The parameter of in Self-Refine is the number of iterations of Self-Refine. For each task, we set the number of iterations to 3 so that the number of tokens used is approximately the same. We use the same template as in the original paper and set the number of in-context examples to the same as in the PoT. We can observe in Table 4 that the proposed C-ToT (Stand.) and C-ToT (Duel.) algorithms achieve the best performance in almost all tasks. The Self-Refine also achieves promising results in QA tasks, while it performs relatively poorly compared to the SToT and C-ToT algorithms in complex tasks that require step-by-step interaction and reasoning, such as Game of 24. Method / Data Gsm8k Coin flip (OOD) BBH AQuA Game of 24 Sudoku CoT 68.8 ± 2.5 56.3 ± 2.1 67.7 ± 2.6 42.3 ± 2.5 4.3 ± 3.2 44.4 ± 2.3 SToT 59.3 ± 2.4 62.1 ± 2.9 69.6 ± 2.0 57.1 ± 2.1 34.3 ± 3.9 60.0 ± 3.8 PoT 62.2 ± 3.3 71.1 ± 2.8 66.7 ± 2.3 47.5 ± 4.5 27.2 ± 3.7 43.1 ± 3.9 Self-Refine 67.6 ± 3.2 64.8 ± 1.6 69.2 ± 3.7 56.2 ± 4.1 16.3 ± 3.9 52.3 ± 3.0 C-ToT (Stand.) 71.3 ± 3.3 66.2 ± 2.8 75.7 ± 1.9 61.4 ± 2.9 40.0 ± 4.6 74.4 ± 2.1 C-ToT (Duel.) 73.0 ± 2.7 70.4 ± 2.1 80.0 ± 2.2 63.0 ± 2.6 41.0 ± 3.0 75.4 ± 3.3  

> Table 4: Performance comparisons on benchmark datasets. On each dataset, 5 test runs were conducted and the average accuracy as well as standard deviation are presented, and the best one is emphasized in bold.

Our method is generally not comparable to GoT (Besta et al., 2023), but the idea of comparison can improve GoT. The GoT divides a complex task into several subtasks, generate thoughts for each subtask and merge them, while the ToT-style 15 Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

methods aim at step-by-step thinking, where the new generated thought is based on previous ones, so it is hard to split or merge. Thus, they are better suited for different tasks. For example, for sorting, we can divide it into subtasks; while for the Game of 24, the answer should be generated based on previous thoughts, so C-ToT is more proper. We can use the idea of comparison to improve the solving of subtasks, so we can subsequently improve the GoT. The following is a preliminary study of the sorting task in the GoT paper, remaining all its setups, and comparing the performance with scoring mechanism by LLM and the pairwise comparison mechanism by LLM in subtasks. Accuracy and token usage are reported as in Table 5. 5 test runs were conducted and the average accuracy and the number of tokens (completion tokens / prompt tokens) are reported. Data / Method S-GoT C-GoT 32 elements 90.4%; 1232/12726 90.5%; 1217/14969 64 elements 86.1%; 2592/31118 86.6%; 2356/35313  

> Table 5: Performance comparisons with GoT.

C.2. Cost and Efficiency 

In Table 6, 7 and 8, we report the token cost and average accuracy comparison of our proposed approaches with other contenders. 5 test runs were conducted and the average accuracy and the number of tokens (completion tokens / prompt tokens) are reported. We can observe that the token costs of our proposed C-ToT approaches and the contenders are task-specific and generally incomparable. Since we preserve all previous intermediate thoughts in the QA task, the token cost of the C-ToT approaches is higher than that of the S-ToT algorithm, but the performance is simultaneously improved. In the QA and Game of 24, the token costs of the Comp-SToT and S-ToT approaches are comparable, but the Comp-SToT approaches achieve better average accuracy. In the Sudoku puzzle, the token cost of Comp-SToT is lower than that of S-ToT. These results indicate the effectiveness of using the direct pairwise comparison approach to find the most promising intermediate thoughts. In practice, we can further reduce the token cost by using a counter for each intermediate thought to track its comparison frequency. If the comparison count of an intermediate thought exceeds a threshold, we can remove it from the tree. Method Generate/Prompt tokens Cost per case Accuracy CoT 106/136 0.0003 42.3% SC-CoT 1647/2023 0.0054 58.4% SToT 1551/5415 0.0085 57.1% SC-SToT 2081/13459 0.018 57.6% Comp-SToT 1515/6299 0.0093 59.0% Back-SToT 1551/8135 0.011 58.0% C-ToT (Stand.) 1498/14627 0.017 61.4% C-ToT (Duel.) 1649/52044 0.055 63.0%  

> Table 6: Average accuracy of different methods with token costs on QA.

Method Generate/Prompt tokens Cost per case Accuracy CoT 99/437 0.0006 4.3% SC-CoT 1717/6555 0.010 8.0% SToT 1368/12205 0.015 34.3% SC-SToT 2284/40825 0.045 40.0% Comp-SToT 1309/11963 0.015 36.3% Back-SToT 1679/23178 0.027 39.0% C-ToT (Stand.) 2452/21003 0.026 40.0% C-ToT (Duel.) 2174/60578 0.065 41.0%  

> Table 7: Average accuracy of different methods with token costs on Game of 24.

16 Generating CoTs with a pairwise-comparison approach to searching for the most promising intermediate thought 

Method Generate/Prompt tokens Cost per case Accuracy CoT 431/178 0.001 44.4% SC-CoT 6292/2666 0.015 47.8% SToT 6309/23933 0.037 60.0% SC-SToT 6568/70129 0.083 66.7% Comp-SToT 2666/13164 0.019 65.6% Back-SToT 4536/21383 0.030 72.2% C-ToT (Stand.) 5340/29565 0.040 74.4% C-ToT (Duel.) 7148/86425 0.101 75.5% 

Table 8: Average accuracy of different methods with token costs on Sudoku. 

C.3. Ablation Studies 

We report the ablation studies on Aqua dataset, while we also observe the same trend in other datasets. 5 test runs were conducted and the average accuracy and the number of tokens (completion tokens / prompt tokens) are reported. We study the number of intermediate thoughts generated and selected in each round and report the results in Table 9. With a fixed number of thoughts generated each round, selecting more thoughts leads to higher costs, while accuracy may not benefit much. With a fixed number of thoughts selected each round, generating more thoughts leads to a significant increase in accuracy because we can explore more thoughts. These results could benefit the further use of CoT methods. Generate m / Select K K = 1 K = 2 K = 3 K = 5 K = 6                               

> m= 1 41.6% ; 50/515 ––––
> m= 3 46.7% ; 139/1525 50.2% ; 244/2565 49.8% ; 375/3658 ––
> m= 5 50.1% ; 288/2653 53.5% ; 495/4452 55.0% ; 549/5945 54.8% ; 882/9379 –
> m= 10 53.0% ; 518/5189 56.6% ; 896/8716 57.3% ; 1091/11875 57.5% ; 2120/19473 57.6% ; 2155/20982
> m= 12 53.8% ; 674/6334 57.4% ; 1212/10732 61.4% ; 1498/14627 61.4% ; 1531/16002 61.5% ; 2125/26329

Table 9: Ablation studies on parameters. 

We study the threshold for removing intermediate thoughts vs. accuracy and cost and report the results in Table 10. Under the same tree depth, different thresholds show relatively stable performance. Depth d / Threshold Th Th = 1 Th = 2 Th = 3 Th = 4 Th = 5                   

> d= 3 58.0% ; 1062/11337 60.7% ; 1315/13611 61.0% ; 1478/15111 61.4% ; 1513/15713 61.4% ; 1558/16107
> d= 4 58.8% ; 1426/13792 60.9% ; 1732/18822 61.4% ; 1771/19940 61.6% ; 1804/20003 61.3% ; 2001/20312
> d= 5 60.0% ; 1760/17556 61.0% ; 2143/21006 61.6% ; 2271/23412 61.7% ; 2265/24031 61.3% ; 2425/24755

Table 10: Ablation studies on the number of thresholds for removing intermediate thoughts. 

We study the number of comparison and report the results in Table 11. In general, increasing the number of comparison results in better accuracy and higher cost. Dataset / Comparison n n = 1 n = 3 n = 5 n = 8 

Aqua 61.4% ; 1498/14627 63.0% ; 1649/52044 64.3% ; 1824/78194 64.7% ; 1997/128802 

Table 11: Ablation studies on the number of comparisons. 

17