Title: MLLM-Microscope: Unlocking Hidden Structure Within Multimodal Large Language Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.00909v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 01:04:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# MLLM-Microscope: Unlocking Hidden Structure Within Multimodal Large Language Models 

Ravil Mussabayev 

Satbayev University 

r.mussabayev@satbayev.university 

Rustam Mussabayev 

Satbayev University 

ru.mussabayev@satbayev.university 

Abstract 

This work presents MLLM-Microscope, anovel system designed for analyzing the hid-den representations within Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Our system eval-uates the linearity, intrinsic dimension, and anisotropy of multimodal token embeddings across transformer layers. Utilizing the Sci-enceQA dataset, we evaluate two state-of-the-art MLLMs, LLaVA-NeXT and OmniFu-sion. We find that both the main and residual streams for tokens of both modalities exhibit highly linear behaviors across transformer lay-ers. However, LLaVA-NeXT’s image tokens reveal a slight decline in linearity, whereas OmniFusion’s remain consistent. Image to-ken dimensions in OmniFusion remain consis-tently higher across layers compared to LLaVA-NeXT. Also, the OmniFusion’s anisotropy is observed to stay consistently low throughout the layers. These findings suggest that the inner workings of MLLMs highly depend on the na-ture of modality fusion performed before pass-ing the token sequence into LLM. This and other new potential insights obtainable from our system are surely capable of enhancing our understanding of the inner workings of MLLMs, informing future model design and optimization. 

1 Introduction 

Recently, large language models (LLMs) have provided remarkable emergent capabilities over their smaller counterparts, including instruction following, In-Context Learning (ICL), and Chain of Thought (CoT) (Zhao et al., 2023). Although LLMs have shown outstanding zero or few-shot per-formance on most downstream text-related tasks, intrinsically they are unable to understand other modalities, such as vision, sound, video, etc. CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) was an early work that explored tying different modalities together in a single embedding space through contrastive training. Also, there have been numerous research works aimed at achieving modality fusion within LLMs, such as Flamingo, InstructBLIP, LLaVA-NeXT, and many others (Yin et al., 2024). The large variety of emerging multimodal architectures necessitates advanced tools for their comparative analysis (Zhang et al., 2024). An interesting di-rection for investigation by our proposed system is the distinction between various modality fusion techniques in terms of their impact on the evolu-tion of multimodal tokens through the transformer layers of an underlying LLM. For instance, LLaVA (Liu et al., 2023b) is an example of shallow fusion, while OmniFusion (Goncharova et al., 2024) em-ploys a deeper fusion technique due to the use of a transformer-based adapter. Nowadays, most LLMs are based on transformer architectures, and little is known about their in-ner workings. More detailed insights in this di-rection will prove highly valuable for optimizing the performance of transformer architectures and, consequently, LLMs. The papers by (Nostalge-braist, 2020) and (Belrose et al., 2023) introduced the techniques called “logit lens” and “tuned lens” for understanding how model predictions are re-fined layer by layer relative to the final layer output. However, these works fell short of analyzing the in-herent linearity of transformations between layers. The authors of (Elhage et al., 2021) discovered a hidden linear structure present in small transformer models via a novel mathematical framework. Then, (Razzhigaev et al., 2024) profoundly expanded this line of research by observing that the transforma-tions between consecutive layers in transformer de-coders are almost perfectly linear with Procrustes similarity score of 0.99 .The goal of the present work is to develop a con-venient tool for the inspection of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). The tool allows to examine how the hidden representations of textual and visual tokens alter across transformer layers in terms of linearity (measured by the Procrustes sim-

> arXiv:2606.00909v1 [cs.CL] 30 May 2026

ilarity score), inner dimensionality, and anisotropy. Additionally, our system provides an illuminating visualization of each transformation step. We hope that the presented tool will be useful for researchers and practitioners in gaining insights into the in-ternal mechanisms of multimodal LLMs, driving improvements in the design or training/inference procedures of these models. Our main contributions are the following: 1. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose an efficient and effective system for analyzing the evolution of multimodal token representations across transformer layers of MLLMs; 2. The system is tested on the two recent state-of-the-art MLLMs: LLaVA-NeXT and Omni-Fusion; 3. A comparative analysis between these mod-els is conducted based on the system’s out-put, revealing new emergent characteristics of multimodal tokens in MLLMs and insights about their hidden structure. Our findings are capable of driving and guiding future, more optimal model designs. For instance, they suggest that using a cosine-similarity-based regularization, aimed at reducing layer linear-ity (Razzhigaev et al., 2024a) might be highly relevant for the MLLMs with deeper modality fusion modules. The rest of the article is structured as follows. 

2 Methodology 

Our tool focuses on understanding the hidden rep-resentations in the transformer of an MLLM from multiple sides. Specifically, it examines the degree of linearity and smoothness of transformations be-tween each pair of sequential layers Li and Li+1 ,as well as estimates the intrinsic dimensions and anisotropy scores of representations at every layer. 

2.1 Linearity score 

Let Ti, T i+1 ∈ Rnt×d and Vi, V i+1 ∈ Rnv ×d be the centered sets of embeddings of textual and visual (image) tokens at two consecutive layers, where nt

and nv represent the number of textual and visual tokens in the input sequence, respectively. To measure the linear dependence between two consecutive sets of embeddings, we used a gener-alized Procrustes similarity metric (Gower, 1975). We chose this approach for its robustness in evaluat-ing the linearity of embeddings, particularly given the varying scales across transformer layers. Un-like the L2 norm, which is not scale-invariant, Pro-crustes normalization provides a bounded metric ranging from 0 to 1 (Razzhigaev et al., 2024a). Using tildes to denote matrices normalized by the Frobenius norm, the linearity scores are com-puted as follows: PS t(i) := 1 − min  

> A∈Rd×d

∥ ˜TiA − ˜Ti+1 ∥22, (1) PS v(i) := 1 − min  

> A∈Rd×d

∥ ˜ViA − ˜Vi+1 ∥22. (2) These formulas closely resemble the Procrustes similarity, but instead of minimizing over orthogo-nal transformations, all linear transformations are used to minimize the squared errors (Razzhigaev et al., 2024a). The centered versions of the linearity scores (1) and (2) can be defined as follows: PSC t(i) := 1 − min  

> A∈Rd×d

∥ ˜TiA − ( ˜Ti+1 − ˜Ti)∥22,

(3) PSC v(i) := 1 − min  

> A∈Rd×d

∥ ˜ViA − ( ˜Vi+1 − ˜Vi)∥22.

(4) These scores allow to estimate the linearity in the main flow of the transformer excluding the residu-als. 

2.2 Anisotropy 

Anisotropy, essentially representing the non-uniformity of a distribution in space, provides a lens, through which we can study orientation and concentration of embeddings (Ethayarajh, 2019; Bi´ s et al., 2021). To compute anisotropy, we employ the singular value decomposition (SVD). Let X ∈ { Vi, T i} be a centered matrix of either textual or visual embed-dings extracted from the i-th layer, and σ1, . . . , σ k

be its singular values. Then, the anisotropy score of X is defined as: A(X) = σ21

Pki=1 σ2

> i

.

The singular values can be obtained by comput-ing the eigenvalues σ21 , . . . , σ 2 

> k

of the covariance matrix: 

C = XT Xn_samples( X) − 1 .2.3 Intrinsic dimension 

The intrinsic dimension offers a measure of the effective data dimensionality, highlighting the essence of information that is captured by the em-beddings. Together, these metrics can serve as pivotal tools to probe into the black-box nature of transformers. To determine the intrinsic dimension of a set of embeddings, we employ the methodology pro-posed by (Facco et al., 2018) and (Razzhigaev et al., 2024a). This technique examines how the volume of an n-dimensional sphere, which represents the number of embeddings, scales with the dimension 

d.For each data point in our embeddings, we cal-culate the distances r1 and r2 to their two near-est neighboring points, resulting in a set of pairs 

{(r1, r 2)}. Using this set, we can estimate the in-trinsic dimension d. Specifically, we define: 

μi = r2

r1

,

for each point i.The cumulative distribution function (CDF) of 

{μi} is given by: 

F (μ) = (1 − μ−d)1[1 ,+∞)(μ).

This form of F is derived from the results and proofs provided by the authors of the cited works. From the CDF, we infer: 

log(1 − F (μ)) log( μ) = d. 

To estimate d, we apply linear regression y = kx 

on the plane (x, y ), with: 

xi = log( μi) and yi = 1 − Femp (μi),

where Femp denotes the empirical CDF for {μi}.

3 Dataset 

The ScienceQA dataset (Lu et al., 2022) was used for the experiments. ScienceQA consists of 21,208 multimodal multiple-choice science ques-tions sourced from elementary and high school curricula. It features diverse science topics and an-notations of answers with corresponding lectures and explanations, making it the first large-scale multimodal dataset to do so. The dataset includes: • 10,332 questions with an image context (48.7%); • 10,220 questions with a text context (48.2%); • 6,532 questions with both image and text con-texts (30.8%); • 83.9% of questions annotated with grounded lectures; • 90.5% of questions annotated with detailed explanations. ScienceQA covers a wide range of domains, cat-egorized by subject (natural science, language sci-ence, social science), topic (e.g., Biology, Physics, Chemistry), and skill (e.g., classify fruits and vegetables as plant parts). This rich domain di-versity enhances the evaluation of multi-hop rea-soning ability and interpretability of AI systems. The dataset supports tasks such as multi-modal multiple-choice question answering in English. 

4 Models 

We have selected two competitive state-of-the-art MLLMs for the experimental analysis, LLaVA-NeXT 1.6 and OmniFusion, both of which leverage the Mistral-7b LLM in half precision as their back-bone. LLaVA (Large Language and Vision Assistant) (Liu et al., 2023b) is an end-to-end trained large multimodal model, which connects a vision en-coder and an LLM for impressive results on natural instruction-following and visual reasoning capabili-ties. The pre-trained CLIP visual encoder provides the visual features Z0 = CLIP (input _image ),and a simple linear layer (trainable projection ma-trix W ) is used to fuse them into the LLM’s word embedding space: V0 = W · Z0. Thus, LLaVA is an prominent example of the shallow modality fusion technique. This simple projection scheme is very lightweight and time-efficient. The training of LLaVA was conducted on multimodal multi-turn conversation instruction-following sequences and consisted of two stages: pre-training and end-to-end fine-tuning. In pre-training, we keep both the visual encoder and LLM weights frozen, and maximize the auto-regressive training objective with trainable param-eters W (the projection matrix) only. This stage can be understood as training a compatible visual tokenizer for the frozen LLM. In fine-tuning, we always keep the visual encoder weights frozen, and continue to update both the pre-trained weights of the projection layer and LLM in LLaVA. The subsequent work (Liu et al., 2023a) discov-ered that the original LLaVA model’s multimodal understanding capabilities could be significantly en-hanced with a few simple improvements: swapping the vision encoder to high-resolution CLIP-ViT-L-336px, incorporating a two-layer MLP cross-modal connector, and additional training on academic-task-related data such as VQA. The LLaVA-NeXT model (Liu et al., 2024) presented several further improvements, including a fourfold increase in in-put image resolution, enhanced visual reasoning and OCR capabilities with a better visual instruc-tion tuning data mixture, and improved visual con-versation across various scenarios. The OmniFusion model (Goncharova et al., 2024) is based on a strong pretrained LLM (Mistral-7B) and powerful adapters for visual modality. Om-niFusion also features special tokens of new modal-ities and a multi-stage, end-to-end instructional learning with the gradual unfreezing of the LLM. The training data consisted of a combination of open-sourced synthetic instruction-following data and high-quality image-language datasets, curated for various downstream tasks. Early experiments revealed that OmniFusion matched multimodal GPT-4V in chat capabilities on unseen images and instructions, achieving comparable benchmark re-sults to larger models in various use cases. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Hardware 

The experiments were conducted on a high-performance computational system with the fol-lowing hardware specifications: 2x AMD EPYC 7663 56-Core Processor (100 CPUs), 2x NVIDIA A100 80GB GPUs, 1.5 TiB RAM, and 3 TiB stor-age. This configuration provides substantial com-putational power, enabling efficient execution of large-scale machine learning experiments. 

5.2 Software 

The software environment is set up on a Linux-based system equipped with Python 3.10.14 and the following key libraries installed for running LLMs: 

torch 2.4.0, transformers 4.43.3, datasets 

2.20.0, numpy 1.26.4, and scikit-learn 1.5.1. This software setup ensures a reliable environment for inference of large-scale language models. 

5.3 Implementation details 

Our system’s package is written in Python and bases on the LLM analysis framework developed in (Razzhigaev et al., 2024a). Using the Huggingface’s Transformers API, our code precisely identifies the positions of text and image tokens in every input sequence accord-ing to the peculiar rules defined by each model. For every layer, the embeddings from each input sequence are collected token-wise into two sepa-rate tensors holding the two modalities: text and image. To avoid evaluating the models on the data they have already seen, the experimental tests were per-formed on the test split of the ScienceQA dataset. For instance, LLaVA’s original paper mentioned training their model on the ScienceQA dataset. 

5.4 Downloadable package 

The downloadable package with the full source code and a demo Jupyter notebook is avail-able at GitHub: https://github.com/rmusab/mllm-microscope 

6 Discussion of Results 

The results of running the analysis on 16 random examples from the test split are presented in Fig-ures 1a-1i. In total, 1563 textual and 21964 visual token embeddings of size 4096 were analyzed for both models across 32 transformer layers. Our analysis discovers intriguing patterns in Pro-crustes similarities across layers in Figures 1a-1d. First, both models’ textual and visual tokens ex-hibit an almost perfectly linear behavior across layers. These findings align with the previous re-search (Razzhigaev et al., 2024a). Second, LLaVA-NeXT’s textual tokens exhibit smooth linear re-lationships, whereas OmniFusion’s curve appears jagged. In contrast, LLaVA-NeXT’s image tokens show a slight declining trend in linearity with more layers (both centered and uncentered), whereas Om-niFusion’s behavior is more consistent. This differ-ence in image tokens’ behavior between the models may be attributed to LLaVA-NeXT’s use of a larger number of less preprocessed visual tokens, making the underlying LLM learn more non-linear relation-ships across the layers. In contrast, OmniFusion’s more intricate adapter issues more preprocessed visual tokens that require fewer transformations in the LLM’s layers. (a) Procrustes similarity for textual to-kens 

(b) Procrustes similarity for image to-kens 

(c) Centered Procrustes similarity for textual tokens 

(d) Centered Procrustes similarity for im-age tokens 

(e) Intrinsic dimension for textual tokens (f) Intrinsic dimension for image tokens 

(g) Intrinsic dimension for the joint text-image token distribution 

(h) Anisotropy for textual tokens (i) Anisotropy for image tokens 

Figure 1: Plots illustrating the evolution of textual and visual tokens across intermediate transformer layers for the examined LLaVA-NeXT and OmniFusion models using various scores: uncentered and centered Procrustes similarity, intrinsic dimensions, and anisotropies of intermediate representations. In Figures 1c and 1d, the centered Procrustes similarity scores, which exclude the residuals from consideration, reveal a surprisingly low contribu-tion of transformer block output to the residual stream for MLLMs, significantly lower than that of purely textual LLMs, as reported in (Razzhigaev et al., 2024a). Figures 1e and 1f show that the intrinsic dimen-sions of textual and image token embeddings differ significantly between LLaVA-NeXT and OmniFu-sion. Textual dimensions drop drastically within the first few layers, stabilizing around 20, with LLaVA-NeXT and OmniFusion having slightly smaller and larger values, respectively. In con-trast, OmniFusion’s image token dimensions re-main consistently higher across layers. Again, we hypothesize that this is due to OmniFusion’s com-plex adapter preprocessing, which applies intricate non-linear feature representations to a fixed number of image tokens, resulting in their saturation. As expected, from Figure 1g the joint text-visual dis-tribution is seen to have a slightly higher intrinsic dimension than the marginal distributions. Figure 1h shows a comparable smooth decline in anisotropy for both models towards the final layers, which is only partially consistent with (Razzhigaev et al., 2024b). The curves lack a bell-shaped profile and exhibit high anisotropy in initial layers. We believe this is yet another emergent characteristic of multimodal tokens in MLLMs. Even a more sur-prising situation is observed for the anisotropy of visual tokens in Figure 1i: LLaVA-NeXT’s numer-ous and shallow visual embeddings follow a bell-shaped curve, whereas OmniFusion’s visual repre-sentations are uniformly low with a slight decrease towards the end. This suggests that OmniFusion’s visual tokens are more evenly distributed in all di-rections due to saturation, and its visual adapter compresses information, refining more compact concepts. The PCA-tSNE visualization results from the first, middle, and last layers are presented in Fig-ures 2a-2c. The visualizations from other layers are available in the demo Jupyter notebook of our Python package. At first, PCA reduced data into 50 principal components, then tSNE further reduced the dimension down to 2. The obtained visualiza-tions are consistent with the conclusions discussed above. In particular, scattering of the textual and visual embeddings is observed towards the final lay-ers, which corresponds to a decrease in anisotropy. Also, slight, almost linear variations in the embed-ding streams are visually noticeable upon a close examination of visualizations across neighboring layers. 

7 Conclusion 

In this work, we presented MLLM-Microscope, a novel system for analyzing the hidden struc-tures within Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Our investigation of LLaVA-NeXT and OmniFusion using the ScienceQA dataset uncov-ered a number of important findings. We conclude that multimodal tokens in both models exhibit highly linear trajectories in both main and residual streams across transformer lay-ers. However, LLaVA-NeXT’s image tokens dis-play a subtle decreasing trend in linearity, whereas OmniFusion’s tokens maintain consistency. Image token dimensions in OmniFusion remain consis-tently higher across layers compared to LLaVA-NeXT. Furthermore, OmniFusion’s anisotropy re-mains uniformly low throughout the layers. All these observations suggest that the modality fusion strategy prior to LLM input plays a crucial role in influencing the model’s internal dynamics. This insight can inform future model development and optimization efforts. Specifically, incorporating cosine-similarity-based regularization (Razzhigaev et al., 2024a) to mitigate layer linearity may be particularly beneficial for models featuring more complex modality fusion, such as OmniFusion. Findings and analysis obtainable by our system may provide significant insights into the transfor-mation processes within MLLMs, revealing new emergent characteristics and guiding potential im-provements in model design and training proce-dures. Thus, we strongly believe that MLLM-Microscope will serve as a valuable resource for researchers and practitioners aiming to optimize and advance multimodal AI systems. 

Limitations 

In our experimental study, we used only a single dataset, which could limit the generalization of our findings to other available datasets. Our analysis spanned only two multimodal large language models. This could incur inductive bias in generalizing the obtained observations to the nature of MLLMs at large. Ethics Statement 

We follow strict ethical guidelines in our AI re-search, focusing on transparency and responsibility. Our work analyzes publicly available transformer models and datasets, without using human subjects or sensitive data. This ensures our findings are trustworthy and reproducible. 

Acknowledgements 

This research was funded by the Science Commit-tee of the Ministry of Science and Higher Edu-cation of the Republic of Kazakhstan (grant no. AP26197157). 

References 

Nora Belrose, Zach Furman, Logan Smith, Danny Ha-lawi, Igor Ostrovsky, Lev McKinney, Stella Bider-man, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2023. Eliciting latent predictions from transformers with the tuned lens. Daniel Bi´ s, Maksim Podkorytov, and Xiuwen Liu. 2021. Too much in common: Shifting of embeddings in transformer language models and its implications. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,pages 5117–5130, Online. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan†, Nicholas Joseph†, Ben Mann†, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Ka-plan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah‡. 2021. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Kawin Ethayarajh. 2019. How contextual are contextu-alized word representations? Comparing the geom-etry of BERT, ELMo, and GPT-2 embeddings. In 

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 55–65, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Elena Facco, Maria d’Errico, Alex Rodriguez, and Alessandro Laio. 2018. Estimating the intrinsic di-mension of datasets by a minimal neighborhood in-formation. CoRR , abs/1803.06992. Elizaveta Goncharova, Anton Razzhigaev, Matvey Mikhalchuk, Maxim Kurkin, Irina Abdullaeva, Matvey Skripkin, Ivan Oseledets, Denis Dimitrov, and Andrey Kuznetsov. 2024. Omnifusion technical report. J. Gower. 1975. Generalized procrustes analysis. Psy-chometrika , 40(1):33–51. Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee. 2023a. Improved baselines with visual instruc-tion tuning. Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Sheng Shen, and Yong Jae Lee. 2024. Llava-next: Improved reasoning, ocr, and world knowledge. Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee. 2023b. Visual instruction tuning. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 36, pages 34892–34916. Curran Associates, Inc. Pan Lu, Swaroop Mishra, Tony Xia, Liang Qiu, Kai-Wei Chang, Song-Chun Zhu, Oyvind Tafjord, Peter Clark, and Ashwin Kalyan. 2022. Learn to explain: Multimodal reasoning via thought chains for science question answering. In The 36th Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) .Nostalgebraist. 2020. interpreting GPT: the logit lens. https://www.alignmentforum. org/posts/AcKRB8wDpdaN6v6ru/ interpreting-gpt-the-logit-lens .Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sas-try, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. 2021. Learn-ing transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning .Anton Razzhigaev, Matvey Mikhalchuk, Elizaveta Gon-charova, Nikolai Gerasimenko, Ivan Oseledets, Denis Dimitrov, and Andrey Kuznetsov. 2024a. Your trans-former is secretly linear. Anton Razzhigaev, Matvey Mikhalchuk, Elizaveta Gon-charova, Ivan Oseledets, Denis Dimitrov, and An-drey Kuznetsov. 2024b. The shape of learning: Anisotropy and intrinsic dimensions in transformer-based models. Shukang Yin, Chaoyou Fu, Sirui Zhao, Ke Li, Xing Sun, Tong Xu, and Enhong Chen. 2024. A survey on multimodal large language models. Duzhen Zhang, Yahan Yu, Jiahua Dong, Chenxing Li, Dan Su, Chenhui Chu, and Dong Yu. 2024. Mm-llms: Recent advances in multimodal large language models. Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, Yifan Du, Chen Yang, Yushuo Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Jinhao Jiang, Ruiyang Ren, Yifan Li, Xinyu Tang, Zikang Liu, Peiyu Liu, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2023. A survey of large language models. 

A PCA-tSNE Visualization (a) Layer 0 PCA-tSNE 

> (b) Layer 15 PCA-tSNE
> (c) Layer 31 PCA-tSNE

Figure 2: PCA-tSNE representations of textual and visual tokens from intermediate transformer layers of the examined MLLMs.